 
An Architecture of Adaptive Online Module System 
Based on Felder-Silverman Learning Style Model 
 
 
Arief Hidayat1 
Computer Science Department 
 Universitas Wahid Hasyim 
Semarang, Indonesia 
arief.hidayat@unwahas.ac.id 
Victor Gayuh Utomo2 
Computer Science Department 
Universitas Semarang, Indonesia 
Semarang, Indonesia 
victor@usm.ac.id 
 
Abstract—Students will get some benefits by knowing their 
own learning style. The adaptive online module system gives 
students a learning environment that adapting to their learning 
style. The architecture of the adaptive online module system 
consists of a domain model, media space, student model, 
instruction model, adaptive model and user interface. The 
system identifies student learning style using a questionnaire 
based on the Felder-Silverman Learning Style Model 
(FSLSM). The stereotype of student learning style stored in the 
student model. The adaptive model delivers the appropriate 
learning experience based on the student model. The 
adaptability is delivered in the form of adaptive content and 
adaptive navigation. 
Keywords: architecture, adaptive online, module system, 
Felder-Silverman Learning Model 
I. INTRODUCTION  
Students will get some benefits by knowing their own 
learning style. First, it will raise students’ awareness of their 
learning styles and the impact of the learning styles into their 
lesson. Students may also use the awareness to understand 
the difficulties they met in learning and creating some 
groundwork to overcome their weakness. Second, student 
style information can be used to provide learning activities or 
materials and personalization recommendations according to 
their learning style [1].  
The student learning style is the first thing to 
acknowledge when considering learning styles in education. 
Brusilovsky [2] mention that there are two kinds of student 
modeling. The first one is a collaborative approach. In this 
model, the student explicitly provides feedback that can be 
used to build and update the student’s model. For example, 
the student gives data for the student modeling process by 
declaring the relevancy of content for their learning 
objectives explicitly. Another form in this modeling is letting 
the students adapt by themselves and show directly their 
expectations of the system. For example, students may 
rearrange link sequence in a page, showing their preference 
sequence of a system. Another possibility is by allowing the 
student to change and update directly the student model 
information. Regarding learning styles, the means frequently 
used is by asking students to fill a questionnaire which will 
give the required information about their learning styles. 
Second, modeling is an automatic approach in which the 
building and updating process of the model happened 
automatically based on the students' behavior while using the 
system for learning. [2].  
There are two styles in student modeling, i.e. static and 
dynamic. In the static modeling style, the modeling process 
takes place at the beginning of the learning process so the 
information of the student model is stored once. In learning 
system application, students need to supply the information 
as a new user. While on dynamic student modeling, the 
modeling process happened on more than one occasion 
which allows the system to update information about the 
student model frequently. The dynamic student modeling, 
allowing the system to respond appropriately to the changes 
in the student behavior [1].  
Several 
studies 
on 
adaptive 
learning 
system 
developments have been made. The studies based on an 
adaptation of learning style with a questionnaire as the tool 
(using static and collaborative approach). Some of the studies 
are CS383 [3], IDEAL [4], LSAS [5], and WHURLE [6]. In 
this paper, an adaptive system architecture will also be 
implemented into an adaptive online module system by 
integrating student modeling within the system. Through 
static student modeling, which will understand the students 
learning style using the questionnaire, and store the 
information into student models, the system may access the 
needed information to give adaptive and personalized 
learning material for students. Adaptive system architecture, 
as well as some support system, integrated into the adaptive 
online module system to provide students with adaptive 
support.  
This study is based on the Felder-Silverman Learning 
Style Model (FSLSM) [7] which consider that every student 
has a preference in each of the four dimensions: processing 
(active/reflective), understanding (sequential/global), input 
(visual/verbal), and perception (sensing / intuitive). FSLSM 
is a learning style model that explains the learning style in 
detail and very well suited to accomplish the adaptability of a 
learning system [8]. It is the reason FSLSM, on many 
occasions, acts as a basis in the learning enhancement system. 
FSLSM, based on the concept of the tendency, consider 
learning style rather as the main tendency than fixed and 
static which in return allowed to handle exceptional behavior 
from the student. While FSLSM considers that the tendency 
more or less stays the same, it also opened to the possibility 
that the tendency may change from time to time. The 
tendency changing is known to be domain-independent.  
Advances in Social Science, Education and Humanities Research, volume 440
International Conference on Online and Blended Learning 2019 (ICOBL 2019)
Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Atlantis Press SARL.
This is an open access article distributed under the CC BY-NC 4.0 license -http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.
70
After the student model stores the information about the
student, adaptability may be given. Consideration of some
different aspects is taken when targeting students with
customized learning for them. One dimension considers what
may be customized in the system. Different methods are
available to deliver adaptive learning for students. The
methods define the appropriate features of the systems for
the
specified
students.
Brusilovsky
[9]
defines
the
adaptability of the system, based on the purpose, into two
areas,
adaptive
presentation,
and
adaptive
navigation.
Adaptive
presentation
is
a
feature
that
changes
the
presentation of learning content such as, presenting the
content in text or multimedia or the modality of content, all
in
an
adaptive
manner.
Whereas
adaptive
navigation
conducted by manipulating links which include features like
a direct guide, adaptive map, adaptive sorting, hiding,
annotation, and link generator.
Both features can be used
together, for
example,
changing the navigation using the predetermined rule while
at the same time changing the presentation, either deliver the
content in text form or multimedia form, using the rules that
had been set.
II. RELATED WORK
Several other adaptive learning systems which are based on
learning style adaptation using questionnaire have been done.
Learning Style Adaptive System (LSAS) by Bajraktarevic et
al [5] utilizes only one dimension from FSLSM (Felder and
Silverman Learning Style Model), which is understanding, a
dimension
of
sequential/global.
In
order
to
gather
information about student learning styles, the system uses the
ILS (Index of Learning Style by Felder and Soloman [10])
questionnaire. The adaptability of the system delivered by
two different templates of the user interface. Each page for
the student with sequential preference contains a small part
of the information in the form of text only. To navigate from
the page, ‘forward’ and ‘back’ link/buttons provided to
deliver a linear learning path. Meanwhile, a student with a
global preference has an advantage in terms of navigation.
The page contains several elements such as a table of
contents, page overview, related links in the text as well as a
section with additional links and a summary at the end of the
page. The provided elements give students an overview of
the selected topic and give an opportunity to roam freely
using a numerous choice of links. An experiment that
involves
21
students
is
conducted
to
evaluate
the
effectiveness and the adaptability of the system. The
experiment consists of 2 parts. In the first part of the
experiment,
students
use
the
system
which
behaves
appropriately to their learning style. In the second part, the
students use the system which behaves opposite to their
learning style. Based on the pre-install on post result, the
students significantly perform better when the system
behavior suited their learning style.
Brown et al [6] developed the WHURLE (Web-based
Hierarchical Universal Reactive Learning Environment).
WHURLE based on ILS but only utilize the visual/verbal
dimension (input dimension). Under the condition, the
questionnaire consists of 11 items only. Brown et al [6]
successfully integrated the visual/verbal learning style with
the adaptive learning system. The experiment also held to
understand
the
impact
of
the
adaptive
system.
The
experiment gives results in quantitative and qualitative data.
Based on quantitative data, there is no significant difference
from the adaptive system compared to the traditional
approach. Meanwhile, based on the qualitative data, students
show their preference for the adaptive system rather than the
traditional approach. The students think that a personalized
system shows that need is acknowledged and fulfilled while
the traditional approach is a ‘one size fits all’. This kind of
information is often missed on empirical studies while still
important part when evaluating the system. This study shows
that learning styles integration into an adaptive hypermedia
system is possible and the result is promising in motivating
the student while the academic result itself unaffected.
III. STUDENT MODEL BASED ON LEARNING STYLE
The student model is an abstract representation of the
student in the adaptive online module system. There are two
important processes of how this adaptive online module
system realizes its adaptive function. First, the adaptive
online module system should collect data on students, then
process the data to regulate the student model, called student
modeling. Later, the system should apply the student model
to behave in an adaptive manner.
The student model designed in this study is composed of
the profile of the student, the learning history, and the
learning
style.
Student
profiles
store
basic
individual
information, such as names, user names, and passwords, as
well as other individualized information so that the system
can identify the student. The learning history stores the
learning process of the learner's students, such as the subjects
being studied by the students and participation in the
discussion. This history facilitates the teacher or lecturer to
understand the student. The learning style of the student is a
very important dimension in the student model, as it is the
key to achieving adaptability in the adaptive online module
system. Researchers use stereotypes to represent student
learning styles.
One student has a different learning style compared to the
others, and the different learning styles correspond to
different teaching styles as well. For example, some students
prefer to receive better information through visual sensor
channels or while others auditory canal channels. In this case,
the learning process for the first kind of students is better
adapted with visual materials (such as images) while the
second students using sound or text (composed of words,
then connected with auditory information processing).
Learning styles can be represented in a stereotypical
model based on the Felder-Silverman Learning Style Model.
The model consists of four dimensions, perception, input,
processing and understanding. The dimensions are described
as follows [11] :
1. Perception describes the level of abstraction of the
learning material favored by the student. Consists of
sensing students and intuitive students. Sensing students
liked the fact and require more practice case study, while
the intuitive student usually prefers innovation and dislike
repetition
2. Input dimension indicates whether the student prefers
listening (textual) documents or visual documents. The
students who fall into the category called the verbal
student and visual student accordingly.
Advances in Social Science, Education and Humanities Research, volume 440
71
3. Processing dimension indicates the student’s preference
in processing information. The active students like to
involve in activities or discussion while reflective students
prefer to introspect the lesson by themselves.
4. Understanding
dimension
indicates
which
progress
students understand better. Sequential students prefer an
explanation in the form of sequence. Meanwhile, global
students prefer an overview of the selected topic and
shown steps and relationships of the learning material.
IV. ARCHITECTURE OF ADAPTIVE ONLINE MODULE SYSTEM
This
adaptive
online
module
system
has
a
main
architecture consisting of media space, domain model,
student model, instruction model, adaptive model and user
interface, as shown in figure 1.
Figure 1. Architecture of adaptive online module system
based on FSLSM
A. A subsection Domain Model
The domain model holds information on the learning
objectives hierarchy. The hierarchy is a structure that
manages the learning components and their relationships.
The learning components consist of instructional objectives
and instructional resources. Such a relationship between the
components composes domain knowledge. The domain itself
acts as a repository to store and organize the hierarchy in
certain areas, like courses.
B. Media Spaces
The
media
space's
main
function
is
storage
for
instructional resources. Media space uses an instructional
resources database to fulfill its purpose. Learning materials
stored in the database take various forms. Basic resource
available in text form with some images while more
sophisticated resources may come in the shape of audio,
video or animation
C. Student Model
Student model store learning profile of the student. In the
adaptive online module system,
students declare their
learning profile by filling questionnaire after logged in to the
system for the first time. While students may take the
questionnaire again, essentially students only need through
the process once. Learning profile processed to produce the
appropriate learning style. The adaptability of the system is
achieved by analyzing the learning style to customize the
learning material for each individual
D. Instruction Model
The instruction model is used by the teacher. It stores
content selection rules and media selection rules. The teacher
determines which content and media will be available for
specific learning material. In the process, the teacher needs to
determine multiple media for each content, helped by the
system, to accommodate the various student learning style.
Actually, teachers don’t explicitly determine which content
and media for a student with a particular learning style. The
customization is done by the system so while the teacher
simply puts a static / fixed learning material, the student gets
an adaptive learning material both in the order/navigation of
the material and the content of the material
E. Adaptif Model
The adaptive model is the heart of the whole system. The
adaptive model brings adaptability to offer a customized and
personalized learning experience to students. Specifically, in
the
adaptive
online
module
system,
there
are
two
adaptabilities offered to students, adaptive content and
adaptive navigation.
The adaptive model used previously stored information in
the domain model, instruction model, and student model to
choose the appropriate content from media space and
delivering the adaptive content to students. Adaptive content
may vary from choosing the media form (text or picture or
others), decision to put summary of the material or giving a
quiz to challenge the student
Adaptive navigation also uses the information in the
domain model, instruction model, and student model but not
from media space. The adaptive navigation determines the
sequence of the contents or even the absence of the
sequence. Adaptive navigation also determine the available
link for each student. While the adaptive content gives
different
learning
material
to
the
student,
adaptive
navigation may give a whole different experience in
exploring the learning material.
F. User Interface
The user interface acts as a medium from the system to
students. The user interface generates an interface based on
the decision of the adaptive model. If a student makes
interaction with the user interface, e.g. clicking a button,
then the user interface will send the information to the
adaptive model that determines the next content/navigation.
The user interface uses the adaptive model decision to
generate the next interface.
V. CONCLUSION
The adaptive online module system delivers a learning
material that gives adaptive learning experience to the
student. The architecture of the system consists of a domain
model, media space, student model, instruction model,
adaptive model and user interface. At system initiation, the
student needs to fill the questionnaire based on the Felder-
Silverman Learning Style Model (FSLSM). The information
is stored in the student model. The information creates the
learning style stereotype of a particular student. The student
model is the base for the system to deliver an adaptive
learning experience. The system delivers adaptability by
Advances in Social Science, Education and Humanities Research, volume 440
72
delivering both adaptive content and adaptive navigation.
The
adaptive
model
chooses
the
appropriate
learning
material from the media space and creates a unique
experience by controlling the flow of learning based on the
student learning style.
For future work, the proposed architecture may get an
advantage by getting feedback from student interaction with
the user interface. The proposed architecture currently
acknowledges the student learning style based on the
questionnaire result. However, the questionnaire result is
probably flawed. Such a flaw may happen when the
preference of certain styles, based on the questionnaire result,
is
decided
by
a
small
margin.
While
the
original
questionnaire method guarantees a result, i.e. a preference,
such a case is considered has no real result. Learning the
interaction of the student with the user interface may reveal
the real student learning style.
Developing the adaptive online module system as mobile
application is also considered. Current technology make it
possible to put a lot of processing power and storage capacity
in a smartphone. A mobile application can make use of those
benefits to provide better contents and features compared to
web application
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Researchers would like to thank to the Ministry of
Research
and
Technology
-
Higher
Education
(KEMENRISTEK-DIKTI) which provide funding for this
research.
REFERENCES
[1]
Graf S., Kinshuk, Zhang Q., Maguire P., Shtern V. 2010 “An
Architecture for Dynamic Student Modelling of Learning Styles in
Learning Systems and its Application for Adaptivity”, Proceedings of
the International Conference on Cognition and Exploratory Learning
in Digital Age (CELDA2010), October, Timisoara, Romania, pp. 103-
110.
[2]
Brusilovsky,
P.
1996”Methods
and
Techniques
of
Adaptive
Hypermedia”, User Modelling and User-Adapted Interaction, Vol 6,
No. 2-3, pp. 87-129.
[3]
Carver, C.A., Howard, R.A. and Lane, WD. 1999, “Addressing
Different Learning Styles
through Course Hypermedia”, IEEE
Transactions on Education, Vol. 42, No. 1, pp. 33-38.
[4]
Shang, Y., Shi, H. and Chen, S.-S. 2001, “An Intelligent Distributed
Environment for Active Learning”, ACM Jounal of Educational
Resources in Computing, Vol. 1, No.2, 1-17.
[5]
Bajraktarevic, N., Hall, W. and Fullick, P. 2003, “Incorporating
Learning Styles in Hypermedia Environment : Empirical Evaluation”,
Proceedings of the Workshop on Adaptive Hypermedia and Adaptive
Web-Based Systems, Nottingham, UK, Eindhoven University, pp. 41-
52.
[6]
Brown, E., Stewart, C., Brailsford, T. 2006“Adapting form visual and
verbal learning styles in AEH”, Proceedings of the Sixth International
Conference
on
Advanced
Learning
Technologies
(ICALT'06),
Kerkrade, The Netherlands, July 5 - 7, 1145-1147.
[7]
Felder, RM. And Silverman, L.K. 1998, “Learning and Teaching
Styles in Engineering Education”, Engineering Education, Vol. 78,
No. 7, pp. 674-681.
[8]
Kuljis, J. and Liu, F. 2005, “A Comparison of Learning Style
Theories on Suitability for E-learning”, Proceedings of the Iasted
Conference on Web Technologies, Applications, and Services,
Calgary, Alberta, ACPTA Press, pp. 191-197.
[9]
Brusilovsky, P. 2001, “Adaptive Hypermedia”, User Modeling and
User-Adapted Interaction, Vol 11, No. 1, pp. 87-110.
[10] Felder, R.M. and Soloman, B.A., 1997, Index of Learning Styles
questionnaire.
Retrieved
11
January,
2016,
from
http://www.engr.ncsu.edu/learningstyles/ ilsweb.html.
[11] Sangineto, E. 2008,“An
Adaptive
E-Learning Platform for
Personalized Course Generation”. In Claus Pahl.(ed)
Architecture
Solutions for E-Learning Systems. IGI Publishing. 2008.
Advances in Social Science, Education and Humanities Research, volume 440
73
