See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/339407366
Analysing the learning style of an individual and suggesting ﬁeld of study
using Machine Learning techniques
Conference Paper · July 2019
DOI: 10.1109/ICCES45898.2019.9002051
CITATIONS
11
READS
269
5 authors, including:
Lekshmi S Nair
Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham Kollam
18 PUBLICATIONS   53 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Lekshmi S Nair on 20 November 2020.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
Analysing the learning style of an individual and
suggesting ﬁeld of study using Machine Learning
techniques
Ananthu S Kuttattu1, Gokul G S2, Hari Prasad3, Jijith Murali4 Lekshmi S Nair5
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham
Amritapuri, India
1anandhus.kuttattu@gmail.com, 2gokulg35@gmail.com, 3prasadhari905@gmail.com,
4jijith331@gmail.com, 5lekshmiprabha.s@gmail.com
Abstract—The learning style can be referred to as the way a
student prefers to acquire, process and retain information. The
prominent learning style classiﬁcation model is the VAK model.
[1] According to this model visual, kinesthetic and auditory are
the three major kinds of learning styles. Many research have
shown that people prefer more than one way of learning, hence
categorizing a person to just one of the above types as done in
traditional methods is not accurate.[7] A method to identify our
learning styles more accurately is required. Machine learning can
be applied in this ﬁeld to achieve our aim in the most efﬁcient way.
Once we have an accurate information about learning styles, we
can use it to suggest career options. This research aims to predict
the learning style combinations of students and suggest ﬁeld of
study using algorithms like k-means, SVM and decision tree.
Index Terms—Machine Learning, auditory, visual, kinesthetic,
Rule based system, k-means, SVM, Decision Tree
I. INTRODUCTION
Choosing an appropriate ﬁeld for higher studies is a com-
plicated task. Most students require guidance in making the
perfect choice. The domain of study of a student needs to
suite not only the interest but also the learning style which
will impart a way for career advancement. Even though there
are many options that help in shortlisting career options, not
many of them use learning style as one of the criteria for
coming up with the choice.
Most of the traditional ways to identify the learning styles
are predeﬁned mathematical equations and patterns of ques-
tions that comes to a conclusion. It is not accurate because
students prefer more than one mode of learning. The most
widely accepted categories of learning styles are:
• Auditory
• Visual
• Kinesthetic
A student is said to be an auditory learner if he/she learns by
listening. They tend to understand information in a better way
when they hear it. These types of learners are comfortable with
lectures, discussions and reading aloud. They get the idea after
being told a couple of times since they are good listeners. They
have a tendency to read aloud, this helps them in understanding
the information in a better manner.
The main tool for a visual learner are their eyes, i.e they
learn through vision. Visual learners beneﬁt more from a live
demonstration of how things are done. They require diagrams,
ﬂowcharts, presentations, etc for a better understanding of the
information presented to them.
Kinesthetic learners are those who require hands-on ex-
perience to understand the concept. They like to be more
involved in the processes that require their attention when
compared to the other two types of learners. These learners
require active learning methods like role-playing, hands-on
workshops, practicals, etc for processing the information in
a better manner.
Categorizing a student based on the above mentioned
learning styles is not an easy task, because most students
prefer more than one way of learning. For example, a visual
learner might be interested in hands-on workshops. In such
case a student can be considered as a kinesthetic learner too. In
these type of situations, the traditional methods for identifying
the learning style which are based on predeﬁned equations
and question patterns are less accurate. Thus it demands the
possibility of the existence of combinations in learning styles.
A student may exhibit more than one learning style. In order
to ﬁnd this combination of learning styles, we apply machine
learning. We will be using the classiﬁcation and the clustering
to ﬁt a learner into an appropriate class of learning style.
Clustering is an unsupervised machine learning technique.
We used the k-Means clustering algorithm as it is an iterative
algorithm, that tries to partition the dataset into k predeﬁned
distinct non overlapping subgroups where each data point
belongs to only one group and inter cluster data points can
be made. We do the classiﬁcation which groups new data into
known classes while clustering relies on underlying patterns
to come up with the clusters. We have used two classiﬁcation
algorithms, Support vector machines (SVM) and Decision tree.
We have used SVM to predict the individual learning style
and decision tree to predict the learning style combination.
All these algorithms were chosen in order to maximise the
Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Communication and Electronics Systems (ICCES 2019)
IEEE Conference Record # 45898; IEEE Xplore ISBN: 978-1-7281-1261-9
978-1-7281-1261-9/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE
1671
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Otago. Downloaded on May 22,2020 at 22:31:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
accuracy and efﬁciency of our program.
Once we have acquired a student’s learning style combina-
tion, we can compare it with the learning style combinations
prevalent in existing ﬁeld of study. Based on the degree of
similarity we can suggest an area of study to that person.
Career selection is a subjective process and depends on the
interests of the individual too. With this work, we hope to
suggest valid career options for prospective learners based on
their learning style combination.
II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
Much study was done in the ﬁeld of identiﬁcation or predic-
tion of learning styles. For example, a survey was conducted
in 2016 on 175 students studying MS programming in engi-
neering. For this survey they have used the questions in Index
of Learning Styles by Felder and Soloman [15]. According
to this survey, there is a huge diversity in the learning styles
among engineering students studying in different branches.[6]
A similar survey was conducted among medical students
[3]. A questionnaire consisting thirty nine questions were used.
Two-hundred and ninety students participated in the survey.
Based on the results seventy three percent of the students who
participated in the survey prefer only one learning style, twenty
two percent prefer two learning styles and the rest prefer three
learning styles. Most of the students who prefer single learning
style prefer visual learning style followed by auditory and then
kinesthetic. Among the students who prefer two learning style
ﬁfty four percent prefer visual and auditory, twenty six percent
prefer visual and kinesthetic and the rest prefer auditory and
kinesthetic.
An Indonesian translated version of Joy Reids (1984) Per-
ceptual Learning Style Preference Questionnaire was used to
conduct a survey among 3rd semester English Department stu-
dents of Faculty of Cultural Studies at Universitas Brawijaya
[2]. A total of hundred students participated in the survey, out
of which sixty six were females and the rest were males. The
study revealed that majority of the male students who took the
survey prefers kinesthetic mode of learning while majority of
female students preferred either kinesthetic or group study.
VARK questionnaire developed by Flemming and Miles
(1992) was used to assess the learning style preferences of the
engineering students at Atlm University [4]. The questionnaire
was answered by 107 students out of which sixty one were
from computer science, twenty two were from manufacturing
engineering and twenty four were from mechatronics engineer-
ing. The study showed that around 25.2% of the students prefer
more than one mode of learning style. 27.9% of the computer
science students who took the survey prefers multiple modes
of learning styles and among the students who prefer single
learning style, the most preferred styles are auditory, kines-
thetic and reading/writing. The most popular learning style
among the manufacturing engineering students was found out
to be auditory. 29.2% of mechatronics students prefer multiple
learning style and among the rest of the students who prefer
single learning style, the most preferred style was auditory.
One instance where machine learning was used to identify
the learning style is the website ’First aid for you’. Here, ma-
chine learning was used to observe how the user interacts with
the website and identify patterns in those interactions Those
patters are then used to identify the best type of content for
the next page. Here, they have used Felder & Solomon Index
of Learning Style. Nave Bayes algorithm was used to identify
the preferred learning style of the user and this information
was used to customize the learning environment.[11]
In [5], the use of k-means in multi label classiﬁcation
is being discussed. The rule mining algorithm Apriori is a
popular choice for rule generation, but when it comes to
numerical data. With proper pre-processing, a lot of intricate
rules can be derived form those numerical datasets. K-means
algorithm can be used for this purpose. This helps in ﬁnding
hidden patterns in huge numerical datasets.
A detailed study of the advantages and disadvantages of
both traditional and modern techniques for learning style
identiﬁcation methods was done in [7]. Based on the result it
was identiﬁed that most of the traditional methods which uses
questionnaire and patters in questions lacks authenticity be-
cause they follow a general rule which cannot be applied in all
individual cases. Modern techniques using machine learning
are computationally expensive compared to the traditional ones
but they tend to be more accurate.
Support vector machine (SVM) algorithm is widely used
in classiﬁcation and regression analysis. [8] does a detailed
analysis on the implementation of SVM using both linear and
Map-Reduce fashion. The performance of thus implemented
algorithm is then compared.
A fuzzy inference system was used for predicting preferred
learner style based on the features used for the VARK ques-
tionnaire. The system was tested on a group of students.
The input data for the system was collected from a custom
questionnaire that was designed specially to get the inputs for
the fuzzy inference system. On comparing the output of the
fuzzy system to that of the VARK system it was observed that
48% of the test cases were similarly classiﬁed.[10]
K-Means clustering encounters issues when it deals with
text data. [12] focuses on eliminating this drawback by con-
verting text data into a numerical value which results in more
distinct clusters and accurate running times.
The use of tree augmented Bayes network was observed
to have better classiﬁcation accuracy when compared to naive
Bayesian network. [13] Online learning environment was used
as the platform for automatically detecting students learning
style using tree augmented Bayesian network. The experi-
mental results proved that the tree augmented naive Bayes
network is capable of achieving higher detection accuracy
when compared to the Bayesian network.
Decision trees are commonly used for representing data. In
data mining, many different decision tree algorithms are used
and each of those provide a unique decision tree from the
input data. [14] focus on the comparison of different decision
tree algorithms for data analysis.
A study was conducted among the dental students of King
Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Communication and Electronics Systems (ICCES 2019)
IEEE Conference Record # 45898; IEEE Xplore ISBN: 978-1-7281-1261-9
978-1-7281-1261-9/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE
1672
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Otago. Downloaded on May 22,2020 at 22:31:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Saud University to ﬁnd their learning style pattern [16]. An
arabic version of VARK questionnaire was used to conduct
the survey. The results showed that most students (58.4%)
preferred more than one learning style. Among the students
who preferred single learning style, Kinesthetic and Auditory
were the most prominent.
In [17] the authors have used supervised and unsupervised
machine learning algorithms to predict the learners learning
style. They have used the Felder and Silverman learning style
model for categorizing learners. The unsupervised learning
algorithm that they have used is K means and the supervised
learning algorithm that they have used is Naive Bayes.
The learning style identiﬁcation survey done among the
architecture and interior design students reveal that there is
no signiﬁcant difference between the learning styles between
students of architecture and interior design [18]. Here, the
authors used Felder and Soloman’s Index of Learning Styles
questionnaire to conduct the survey.
III. PROPOSED WORK
Fig. 1.
Steps involved
A. Data Collection
A survey was conducted among the student community of
Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetam University. The survey consisted
of ﬁfteen questions. All the questions were multiple choice
type and choices included ”Strongly Disagree”, ”Disagree”,
”Neutral”, ”Agree” and ”Strongly Agree”. Each of the above
value is mapped to a numerical value, with Strongly disagree
as one and Strongly agree as ﬁve. The survey was conducted
among people with age ranging from ﬁfteen to twenty ﬁve. We
were able to acquire one thousand one hundred and twenty
three inputs. The obtained results was then stored in CSV
format.
B. Data Clustering
Clustering of the data helps us to ﬁnd underlying patterns
and categorize them to different groups called clusters. Here
we are using K-means clustering algorithm. k-means algorithm
is computationally faster when compared to other clustering
algorithms when the number of variables are more. According
to this algorithm, the initial step is to assign k centroids
randomly. Once we identify the centroids, Euclidean distance
between each data point and the centroid is calculated. Each
data points is then assigned to the centroid which is closest
to it. The centroids are then re-positioned for optimization.
These processes are iteratively repeated until the centroids
doesn’t change anymore i.e the centroids are at the center
of the clusters that we wanted to create. Here, after applying
the k-means algorithm we end up with ﬁfty one clusters. Each
and every data will have a cluster number associated with it.
We add this cluster number as a feature in the dataset, so the
total number of features will be sixteen after data clustering.
Once the cluster number is also added to the dataset, we can
divide the dataset into test set and train set. In this case we
will be dividing the data set equally and one will be taken as
test set and the other will be the train set.
C. Data Classiﬁcation
Studies have shown that clustering the data before classiﬁca-
tion can increase the accuracy of the classiﬁcation process. [9]
Also the cluster number that we added after the clustering will
play a vital role in classifying the data. Logistic regression is a
simple and fast classiﬁcation algorithm and we will be using
it in our project. One of the simplest and highly preferred
classiﬁcation algorithm which produce signiﬁcant accuracy
with comparatively less computation power is the Support
Vector Machines (SVM). Support Vector Machine is used
for regression and classiﬁcation. The objective of the support
vector machine algorithm is to ﬁnd a hyperplane in an N-
dimensional space that distinctly classiﬁes the data points.
We apply this algorithm on the training set and trains the
algorithm. Once the training is done we apply the same on the
test set to predict the learning style. We compare the predicted
value of learning style to the existing value and calculates
the accuracy of our prediction. We obtained an accuracy of
92.87%.
D. Combination Prediction
We are at a stage where we could predict the learning
style of a person but we are limited to a single learning style
per person. Our next aim is then to ﬁnd a combination of
learning styles per person. For this we have used a statistical
technique called Rand index. Rand index is used for ﬁnding the
similarity between clusters. Combinations are obtained from
clusters that are similar. If a data point that is in a cluster
Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Communication and Electronics Systems (ICCES 2019)
IEEE Conference Record # 45898; IEEE Xplore ISBN: 978-1-7281-1261-9
978-1-7281-1261-9/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE
1673
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Otago. Downloaded on May 22,2020 at 22:31:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
that is predominantly auditory but if that cluster is similar to
another cluster that is predominantly visual, we can trace that
data point to visual learning style too, in such a way we ﬁnd
the combinations for all the data points present in training set.
Instead of calculating the combinations every time using
adjusted rand index, we could use machine learning to predict
the combinations. One of the most widely used predictive
analytic algorithm is decision tree. Decision tree construct a
tree of predictive decisions made based on actual values of
attributes in the data. We create a training model using decision
tree algorithm which takes the cluster value, the individual
learning style and the combinations obtained using the rand
index method as input. We pass the above said features of the
training set as input to the training model. By doing so we are
training the algorithm for prediction of combinations. Once
we have trained the algorithm, we could pass the test set to
the trained algorithm and obtain combinations as output.
E. Mapping
Now we are able to predict the learning style combination,
in-order to suggest career options we require the information
about the prevalent learning styles present in each career. The
only way to acquire such information is through extensive
survey. Once we have a database containing the most common
career options and their prevalent learning style combinations,
we could compare it with the learning style of a person and
come up with valid suggestions. As of now, information in this
regard is limited and based on some of the previous studies
done in various parts of the world, we have acquired the
following information:
• The prevalent learning styles present among Computer
Science graduates are Auditory and Kinesthetic.
• The prevalent learning style present among Manufactur-
ing Engineering graduates is Auditory.
• The prevalent learning style present among Mechatron-
ics Engineering graduates is Auditory.
• The prevalent learning style present among Medical
graduates is Visual.
Based on the learning style combination of a person we
could suggest any one or more of the career options from the
above list. We have used a rule based system for mapping the
learning styles. The rules that we have created for the rule
based system are as follows:
• Auditory, Kinesthetic and Visual: Computer Science,
Manufacturing engineering, Mechatronics engineering
and Medical
• Auditory and Kinesthetic: Computer Science, Manufac-
turing engineering and Mechatronics engineering
• Kinesthetic and Visual: Computer Science and Medical
• Auditory and Visual: Computer Science, Manufacturing
engineering, Mechatronics engineering and Medical
• Auditory: Computer Science, Manufacturing engineering
and Mechatronics engineering
• kinesthetic: Computer Science
• Visual: Medical
IV. RESULT
The initial distribution of learning styles in our database is
as shown in Fig. 2.
Fig. 2.
Initial classiﬁcation based on learning styles
Based on the rules that we have developed for mapping
we can infer that ﬁfty six percent of the students who took
our survey can choose Computer Science related ﬁeld as
a career option and twenty three percent of the students
can choose Computer science, Manufacturing engineering or
Mechatronics engineering as a career option while the rest can
choose medical ﬁeld as their career choice. Using our proposed
model we were able to efﬁciently predict the learning style
combination of a student. After passing the same database to
our program we obtained the result as depicted in Fig. 3.
Fig. 3.
classiﬁcation based on learning styles after using our program
Here we observe the presence of combinations like Kines-
thetic and Visual (KV), Auditory and Kinesthetic (AK) and
Auditory, Kinesthetic and Visual (AKV) along with Kines-
thetic. If we apply our mapping rules to the above result, we
observe that around twenty six percent of the students who
took our survey can choose any of the four career options,
around twenty percent of the students can take Computer
Science, Manufacturing engineering or Mechatronics engineer-
ing, nearly ﬁve percent of the students can take Computer
Science or Medical as their choice while the rest can choose
Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Communication and Electronics Systems (ICCES 2019)
IEEE Conference Record # 45898; IEEE Xplore ISBN: 978-1-7281-1261-9
978-1-7281-1261-9/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE
1674
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Otago. Downloaded on May 22,2020 at 22:31:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Computer Science as their career option. Compared to the
previous observation, learning style combinations have given
us more accurate and speciﬁc results. Thus, identifying a
student’s learning style combination can help us in coming
up with more precise and unique career suggestions.
V. CONCLUSION
We were able to learn in depth about student learning styles.
Unlike the traditional methods, we are now able to predict
the learning style combinations of a student using machine
learning. The use of machine learning algorithms has provided
a new perspective on the technique of ﬁnding learning styles.
Using a rule-based system, we were able to map learning styles
to certain ﬁelds of study and identifying the ﬁelds of study
that suits a student’s learning style can help the student in
shortlisting career choices.
VI. FUTURE SCOPE
As per the current implementation, we are able to suggest
only four ﬁeld of study. This is because of the lack of data
regarding the prevalent learning styles in other ﬁelds of study.
Much research can be done in this area and once we have
enough information, we can suggest more and more options
to students.
VII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We would like to express our sincere gratitude to the
students of Amrita University who took part in our survey.
REFERENCES
[1] MR. SREENIDHI S K and MS. TAY CHINYI HELENA, ”Styles of
Learning Based on the Research of Fernald, Keller, Orton, Gillingham,
Stillman , Montessori and Neil D Fleming”, INTERNATIONAL JOUR-
NAL FOR INNOVATIVE RESEARCH IN MULTIDISCIPLINARY
FIELD ISSN 2455-0620 Volume - 3, Issue - 4, Apr - 2017
[2] Peptia Asrining Tyas, Mega Saﬁtri, ”Kinesthetic Learning Style Prefer-
ences: A Survey of Indonesian EFL Learners by Gender”, Journal of
English Educators Society, (April 29, 2017).
[3] Alina-Mihaela Buan, ”Learning Styles of Medical Students - Implica-
tions in Education”, US National Library of Medicine National Institutes
of Health, (April 2014)
[4] Burcu Devrim Ictenbas, Hande Eryilmaz, ”Determining Learning Styles
of Engineering Students to Improve the Design of a Service Course ”,
Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences (Volume 28 2011)
[5] H Haripriya, Prathibhamol Cp, Yashwant RPai and M Sai Sandeep,
”Multi Label Prediction Using Association Rule Generation and Simple
k-Means”, 2016 International Conference on Computational Techniques
in Information and Communication Technologies (ICCTICT)
[6] Tulsi PK; Poonia MP and Anu Priya, ”Learning Styles of Engineering
Students.”, Journal of Engineering Education Transformations , Volume
30 , No. 2, October 2016
[7] Y. Helmy., A. Abdo. and R. Abdallah., ”A Proposed Framework for
Learning Style Prediction in Higher Education Environments.”, Interna-
tional Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science and Software
Engineering (Volume 6, Issue 3, March 2016).
[8] M. V. Sukanya, Shiju Sathyadevan, and Sreeveni, U. B. Unmesha,
Benchmarking support vector machines implementation using multiple
techniques, in Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing, 2015,
vol. 320, pp. 227-238.
[9] Yaswanth Kumar Alapati, Korrapati Sindhu ”Combining Clustering
with Classiﬁcation: A Technique to Improve Classiﬁcation Accuracy”,
International Journal of Computer Science Engineering (IJCSE).
[10] Marwah Alian and Adnan Shaout, ”Predicting learners styles based on
fuzzy model”, Springer Science + Business Media New York 2016
[11] Declan Kelly, Brendan Tangney, ”First Aid for You: Getting to know
your Learning Style using Machine Learning. In: Advanced Learning
Technologies”, 2005. ICALT 2005. Fifth IEEE International Conference
(August 2005)
[12] Unnikrishnan, S.; Sreelakshmi, S.; Deepa, G.,”Enhancement of accuracy
in K-means clustering” , International Journal of Control Theory and
Applications Volume 9, Issue 15, 2016, Pages 7619-7626
[13] Ling Xiao Li and Siti Soraya Abdul Rahman, ”Students learning style
detection using tree augmented naive Bayes”, Royal Society Open
Science (June 21, 2018).
[14] Sathyadevan S., Nair R.R. (2015), ”Comparative Analysis of Decision
Tree Algorithms: ID3, C4.5 and Random Forest.”, In: Jain L., Behera
H., Mandal J., Mohapatra D. (eds) Computational Intelligence in Data
Mining - Volume 1. Smart Innovation, Systems and Technologies, vol
31. Springer, New Delhi
[15] ”Index
of
Learning
Styles
Questionnaire”,
https://www.webtools.ncsu.edu/learningstyles/
[16] Moshabab A. Asiry, ”Learning styles of dental students”, The Saudi
Journal for Dental Research (2016) 7, 1317
[17] Ouafae EL AISSAOUI, Yasser EL ALAMI EL MADANI, Lahcen
OUGHDIR and Youssouf EL ALLIOUI, ”Combining supervised and un-
supervised machine learning algorithms to predict the learners learning
styles”, Second International Conference on Intelligent Computing in
Data Sciences (ICDS 2018)
[18] Wafa Labiba, Irene Pasinaa, Abdelhakim Abdelhadia, Goze Bayrama,
Mohammad Nurunnabi, ”Learning style preferences of architecture and
interior design students in Saudi Arabia: A survey”, MethodsX Volume
6, 2019, Pages 961-967
Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Communication and Electronics Systems (ICCES 2019)
IEEE Conference Record # 45898; IEEE Xplore ISBN: 978-1-7281-1261-9
978-1-7281-1261-9/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE
1675
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Otago. Downloaded on May 22,2020 at 22:31:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
View publication stats
