See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/300275890
Dynamically Adaptive Educational Games: A New Perspective
Conference Paper · April 2014
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-05972-3_8
CITATIONS
27
READS
974
3 authors:
Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:
Adaptive Persuasive ICT Tools To Tackle School Burnout Among Youngsters In Brussels View project
Adaptation Techniques for Multimedia Resources inside 3D Virtual Learning Enviornments View project
Pejman Sajjadi
Kennesaw State University
52 PUBLICATIONS   347 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Frederik Van Broeckhoven
Vrije Universiteit Brussel
12 PUBLICATIONS   235 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Olga De Troyer
Vrije Universiteit Brussel
189 PUBLICATIONS   2,973 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Olga De Troyer on 01 May 2016.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
Dynamically Adaptive Educational Games: A
New Perspective
Pejman Sajjadi ‡, Frederik Van Broeckhoven § and Olga De Troyer
Vrije Universiteit Brussel, WISE Research Group, Pleinlaan 2 1050 Brussels
BELGIUM
{ssajjadi,frederik.van.broeckhoven,Olga.DeTroyer}@vub.ac.be
Abstract. Dynamically adapting educational games seem to be useful
for sustaining the engagement of the player to the game. Although there
exist several examples of adaptive educational games, they mostly only
base the adaptation on the performance of the player, and only adapt
the diﬃculty level or the learning content of the game. In this paper,
we propose a model for a richer dynamic adaptation, in which several
aspects are taken into account for providing a more personalized gaming
experience to sustain the engagement of the players to the game.
Keywords: Educational games, Adaptive games, Real-time adaptation
1
Introduction
One of the challenges in designing educational games is to come up with a game
that is appealing, fun to play, and most importantly engaging; but perhaps
the greatest challenge is to sustain the engagement of the player. According to
several authors, e.g., [1,2], a successful game is such that its players experience
the “ﬂow state”, introduced by Csikszentmihalyi [3] and meaning the state of
absolute and utter engagement to an activity. It is shown that the ﬂow state has a
positive impact on learning [4] and should therefore be considered when designing
educational games. Moreover, in his “Experiential Gaming Model” [2], Kiili also
uses the ﬂow theory for facilitating a positive user experience of the player,
but also stresses “the importance of designing and balancing challenges in order
to generate an optimal learning experience for players” (page 2). Furthermore,
motivation is also considered as a key factor for reaching the ﬂow state [5]; the
game must be motivating enough for its players to keep playing it. However,
in the literature, no consensus about the source of motivation in games can be
found. For some [6, 7], the key source of motivation is the narrative context of
the game, whereas for others [5, 8] the system of rewards and goals is the true
cause of motivation. In either case, motivation seems to plays an important role.
Similarly, in educational games, it is also recommended that an eﬀective design
‡Supported by the Vrije Universiteit Brussel, HOA26 project: Towards Cognitive
Adaptive Edu-Games.
§Supported by IWT (www.iwt.be), SBO-project: Friendly ATTAC.
should consider the motivation of the learner, in particular both intrinsic and
extrinsic motivation [5,8–10]. The two mentioned terms have been diﬀerentiated
as follow: “Intrinsic motivation pushes us to act freely, on our own, for the sake
of it; extrinsic motivation pulls us to act due to factors that are external to
the activity itself, like reward or threat” (page 1) [5]. Also stimulating intrinsic
motivation (in addition to stimulating extrinsic motivation) could be important
in sustaining the engagement of the learner (player), especially in the case of
people with low motivation for learning, since the use of extrinsic motivation may
not always work for these people. However, as it is evident from its deﬁnition,
the source of intrinsic motivation can be quite diﬀerent from person to person.
Thus, adaptation of the educational game to the individual learner could be a
way to increase the intrinsic motivation. On the other hand, while at the start
of the game the learner’s intrinsic motivation can be good, it may (quickly)
decrease during the game for all kind of reasons. Dynamically adapting the
game, i.e. while the learner is playing the game rather than only adapting the
game when starting the game or at a new level, could be a way to deal with
varying motivation. However, achieving eﬀective dynamic adaptation in games
is quite challenging, and even more challenging in educational games. This is
mostly due to the need of having a balance between learning and fun in these
games [11,12], and at the same time providing the correct level of challenge to
the player (not under challenging but also not overburdening [2]).
In this paper, we propose a new model for dynamically adaptive educational
games. The model allows for adapting an educational game based on diﬀerent
aspects and at diﬀerent moments, in order to provide a rich personalized ex-
perience, to sustain the engagement of the learner, and thus providing a more
suitable frame for experiencing the ﬂow state. The rest of the paper is organized
as follows: section 2 discusses adaptive games, section 3 introduces the proposed
model, and section 4 provides conclusions and future work.
2
Adaptive Games
In the context of educational games, diﬀerent researches on adaptation have
been performed, for example, in the ELEKTRA project [13] the notion of micro-
adaptivity is introduced to guide and support learners in acquiring knowledge
by informing them, providing hints, or intervening when a misconception occurs.
There are methods for predicting the actions that the player might take while
playing the game and then adapting certain aspects of the game accordingly [14].
There are also methods for generating adaptive game worlds based on the players
and their experience model [14].
In educational games, the adaptation of games is mostly in the form of dif-
ﬁculty adjustments or content adaptations, ranging from its simplest form of
adjusting the diﬃculty level of exercises or content on each new start based on
the previous performance, to dynamic adjustments based on the real-time per-
formance. There are models that use both parameters, performance and content,
for creating adaptive educational games. For example, “The Competence-based
Knowledge Space Theory” [15] is a prime example of a model providing dif-
ferent learning paths for the same learning topic to the players based on their
competencies. We agree that these type of adaptive games do indeed provide a
personalized experience, but we wonder whether they also meet one of the re-
quirements for successful learning, i.e. take into consideration that “people learn
in diﬀerent ways and at diﬀerent paces”? [1] The current adaptation techniques
can deal with the aspect “people learn at diﬀerent paces”, but not with the as-
pect “people learn in diﬀerent ways”. We argue that performance and content,
although being undoubtedly important factors for adapting games, are merely
two factors out of a group of factors that can be used for creating an eﬀective
learning experience in educational games.
3
Proposed Model
We propose a new model for dynamically adapting educational games. The
overview of our model is given in Figure 1. Our model is roughly built on top
of the experiential gaming model proposed by Kiili [2], which in turn is based
on the ﬂow theory [3] and the Kolb’s learning style theory [16]. Based on Kiili’s
work, the goal of his model is to provide a link between gameplay and experi-
ential learning. At the heart of his model lie challenges that should be based on
educational objectives. These challenges should be appropriate for the player to
sustain motivation and engagement.
In our model, similar to Kiili’s, challenge is of considerable importance. As
a structuring framework for deﬁning the challenges, we opt for the learning
style model of Kolb, which advises to go from concrete experience to reﬂective
observation, abstract conceptualization and then active experimentation. The
challenges in the game should be determined based on the educational objective
of the game and Kolb’s learning style theory. As an example, for a game with the
educational objective of learning mathematical concepts, the ﬁrst few challenges
of the game would be deﬁned based on concrete experience, then a reﬂective
observation on the challenges should be provided to the player, then challenges on
abstract conceptualization, and ﬁnally on active experimentation. Furthermore,
the challenges must be tightly coupled with the game.
As the personality of the player may have an impact on how he can be mo-
tivated to play, learn, and stay engaged, our model also takes into consideration
the personal traits of the learner. To model the personality of the player, we cur-
rently use the big ﬁve personality trait theory [17], one of the most researched and
accepted theories in describing human personality. In this theory, ﬁve dimensions
are used to characterize the personality of a person (Neuroticism, Extraversion,
Openness to experience, Agreeableness, and Conscientiousness). The values of
the big ﬁve personality traits of the learner will be used as the starting point for
personalization; for instance if the player is generally an anxious (Neuroticism)
person, lesser or even no temporal constraints could be considered in the game.
As we also want to give due consideration to the fact that “people learn in
diﬀerent ways”, we also consider the learning style of the player. For this, we
Fig. 1. Dynamic Adaptive Educational Game Model
use the VARK learning style theory [18], where learners are categorized into
four groups based on their learning preferences (Visual, Aural, Read/Write, or
Kinesthetic). The VARK learning style theory is actually an instructional the-
ory indicating what method of instruction is going to be more appropriate for
a person. For example, a person might learn better, if the learning material is
presented to him/her in a more visual way (visual learning style) or if the per-
son could kinesthetically interact with the learning objectives perhaps through
gestures using for example Microsoft Kinect (kinesthetic learning style).
Furthermore, and well-accepted, the knowledge level of the player also plays
an important role in the adaptation, as the learning challenges should not be too
easy but also not too diﬃcult. The knowledge level of the player can be assessed
from the records of the previous performances of the player.
All three previously mentioned dimensions: knowledge, personal traits, and
learning style, will be determined before the player commences playing the game,
e.g., through questionnaires, or they may be predeﬁned if the educational game
targets a speciﬁc group of people (e.g., kinesthetic learners). This information
will be saved in the proﬁle of the player and used in each play session. Personal
traits and learning style are considered to be rather stable during a given period
of time (although they may change during the lifetime of a person), and therefore
we consider them to be ﬁxed during the playtime. Knowledge, on the other hand,
may increase during playtime and thus, updates the proﬁle of the player after
each session. Since the mentioned three factors are used for adaptation before
the player actually starts playing the game, we called this oﬄine adaptation.
On the other hand, performance and player’s behavior can be used in real time
to dynamically adapt the game, therefore we call this real time adaptation. There
are several elements that can be measured for determining the performance of
the learner (e.g., success rate, number of errors, task completion time); similarly,
there are also diﬀerent elements that can be taken into account to determine the
player’s behavior or state (e.g., facial expression, eye gazing, speech analysis,
heat rate, and attention level). Nowadays, a variety of (non-intrusive) devices
exists to determine the variations in the value of these elements in real-time (e.g.,
high deﬁnition cameras for detecting heart rate, cameras with thermal lens for
detecting anxiety, cameras with facial expression recognition). Also some devices
promise to assess more than one element at the same time, e.g., Microsoft Kinect
2.0 would measure heart rate, eye gazing, and facial expressions. Based on these
values, the game can be adapted in real-time to sustain the engagement of the
player by trying to keep the ﬂow state. To perform the adaptation, the adaptation
engine (abstracted as part of the game component in the ﬁgure) uses a set of
adaptation rules. Based on the inputs (oﬄine and real-time) relevant adaptation
rules will be triggered. The adaptation rules are in the form of CONDITION-
ACTION rules. An example adaptation rule could be:
IF(learning_style==‘kinesthetic’ && heart_rate >60 && anxiety==‘High’)
THEN{ difficulty_level-=1;
ENVIRONMENT_TEXTURE(Relaxing);
GAME_MUSIC(Relaxing);
IF(EXISTS(Temporal_Constraint))
THEN{ remove(Temporal_Constraint);
} }
There are many aspects of a game that can be adapted, (e.g., textures of
game objects, the environment, the sounds, NPC interactions). What should be
adapted at a speciﬁc moment is speciﬁed by the adaptation rules. In order to
determine the conditions (IF-part) and the consequences (THEN-part) of these
adaptation rules, experiments and research in close collaboration with experts in
psychology and pedagogy is required. Note that the adaptation of the educational
material of the game should be done with respect to the Kolb’s theory; Kolb’s
Learning style theory in fact constraints the possible adaptation rules.
4
Conclusion and Future Work
We started by giving the motivation for having adaptive educational games.
We noticed that for most educational games the adaptation is limited to the
level of diﬃculty. However, this does not guarantee that the player stays en-
gaged. Personality aspects, such as the personal traits and the learning style of
the player, should also be taken into consideration. Therefore, a new model for
more eﬀective adaptation of educational games is proposed. The model is based
on diﬀerent existing and well-accepted theories from diﬀerent domains: the ﬂow
theory of Csikszentmihalyi, the learning style model of Kolb, the big ﬁve person-
ality trait theory, and the VARK learning style theory. In addition, we propose
a distinction between two types of adaptation, oﬄine adaptation and real-time
adaptation. For oﬄine adaptation, we not only consider the current knowledge
level of the player but also his personality and learning style. For the real-time
adaptation, we propose to monitor not only the performance of the learner, but
also the behavior (or state) of the learner. This latter becomes more and more
feasible thanks to new non-intrusive technologies. Using this information, the
game can be dynamically adapted so that the players not only experience the
ﬂow state, but this experience sustain for longer periods. In future work, we will
examine how we can do the adaptation in order to achieve this goal and keep
the perfect balance between playing and learning. This is not straight forward;
there is always the chance that by performing a certain change, the experience of
the user is distorted. Furthermore, it is also necessary to evaluate the suitability
and eﬀectiveness of the diﬀerent theories used (ﬂow model, VARK, Big Five,
and Kolb’s theory).
References
1. Harteveld, C.: Triadic game design. Springer (2010)
2. Kiili, K.: Digital game-based learning: Towards an experiential gaming model. The
Internet and higher education 8(1) (2005) 13–24
3. Csikszentmihalyi, I.S.: Optimal experience: Psychological studies of ﬂow in con-
sciousness. Cambridge University Press (1992)
4. Webster, J., Trevino, L.K., Ryan, L.: The dimensionality and correlates of ﬂow in
human-computer interactions. Computers in human behavior 9(4) (1994) 411–426
5. Denis, G., Jouvelot, P.: Motivation-driven educational game design: applying best
practices to music education. In: Proceedings of the 2005 ACM SIGCHI Interna-
tional Conference on Advances in computer entertainment technology, ACM (2005)
462–465
6. Dickey, M.D.: Three-dimensional virtual worlds and distance learning: two case
studies of active worlds as a medium for distance education. British journal of
educational technology 36(3) (2005) 439–451
7. Fisch, S.M.: Making educational computer games educational. In: Proceedings of
the 2005 conference on Interaction design and children, ACM (2005) 56–61
8. Amory, A., Naicker, K., Vincent, J., Adams, C.: The use of computer games as
an educational tool: identiﬁcation of appropriate game types and game elements.
British Journal of Educational Technology 30(4) (1999) 311–321
9. Jennings, M.: Best practices in corporate training and the role of aesthetics: Inter-
views with eight experts. In: Proceedings of the 2001 ACM SIGCPR conference
on Computer personnel research, ACM (2001) 215–219
10. Dondlinger, M.J.:
Educational video game design: A review of the literature.
Journal of Applied Educational Technology 4(1) (2007) 21–31
11. Prensky, M.: Digital game-based learning. Computers in Entertainment (CIE)
1(1) (2003) 21–21
12. Klopfer, E., Osterweil, S., Salen, K., et al.: Moving learning games forward. Cam-
bridge, MA: Education Arcade (2009)
13. Kickmeier-Rust, M.D., Albert, D.: Micro-adaptivity: protecting immersion in di-
dactically adaptive digital educational games. Journal of Computer Assisted Learn-
ing 26(2) (2010) 95–105
14. Erev, I., Roth, A.E.: Predicting how people play games: Reinforcement learning
in experimental games with unique, mixed strategy equilibria. American economic
review (1998) 848–881
15. Kickmeier-Rust, M.D., Peirce, N., Conlan, O., Schwarz, D., Verpoorten, D., Al-
bert, D.: Immersive digital games: the interfaces for next-generation e-learning?
In: Universal Access in Human-Computer Interaction. Applications and Services.
Springer (2007) 647–656
16. Kolb, D.A.: Learning style inventory. McBer and Company (1999)
17. Judge, T.A., Higgins, C.A., Thoresen, C.J., Barrick, M.R.: The big ﬁve personality
traits, general mental ability, and career success across the life span. Personnel
psychology 52(3) (1999) 621–652
18. Fleming, N., Baume, D.: Learning styles again: Varking up the right tree! Educa-
tional Developments 7(4) (2006)
View publication stats
