My	True	Type
Clarifying	Your	Personality	Type,
Preferences	&	Functions
	
Copyright	©	2014
A.J.	Drenth
Published	by	Inquire	Books
Edited	by	Brent	Meredith
ISBN	978-0-9792168-4-8
	
All	rights	reserved.	No	part	of	this	book	may	be	reproduced	in	any	form,
electronic	or	mechanical,	except	for	brief	quotations,	without	written	permission
from	the	author.	Myers-Briggs	Type	Indicator®,	Myers-Briggs®,	and	MBTI®
are	trademarks	or	registered	trademarks	of	the	Myers-Briggs	Type	Indicator
Trust	in	the	United	States	and	other	countries.
Introduction
Who	am	I?	What	is	my	purpose?	What	should	I	be	doing	with	my	life?	These	are
important	questions	that	we	all	must	wrestle	with.	Further	complicating	matters
is	the	fact	that	we	live	in	a	world	where	firm	answers	are	increasingly	hard	to
come	by.	While	the	options	available	to	us	continue	to	expand	exponentially,
there	seem	to	be	fewer	reliable	standards	for	guiding	and	informing	our
decisions.	This	can	leave	us	feeling	lost	and	overwhelmed,	unsure	of	where	to
turn	for	answers	to	our	most	pressing	questions.
It	is	out	of	this	state	of	dizziness	and	confusion	that	we	often	come	to	personality
typing,	or	what	is	sometimes	called	typology.	We	come	seeking	insight	into	who
we	are	and	what	we	should	do	with	our	lives.	We	crave	a	clearer	sense	of
purpose	and	direction.
More	specifically,	we	come	to	typology	seeking	a	more	objective	understanding
of	who	we	are.	We	want	to	know	where	we	fit	into	the	bigger	picture	of
humanity.	Through	the	objective	lens	of	typology,	we	hope	to	gain	greater
confidence	and	certainty	about	who	we	are,	as	well	as	the	roles	we	might	play	in
the	collective	drama.
Given	these	high	hopes	and	expectations,	it	is	unfortunate	that	so	many	people
encounter	an	unexpected	hurdle	at	the	very	outset	of	their	typological	journey—
type	confusion.	Although	they	may	have	been	furnished	a	type	(e.g.,	INFJ)	after
taking	a	personality	assessment,	upon	further	investigation,	they	may	come	to
doubt	its	accuracy.	This	may	prompt	them	to	retake	the	test,	sample	other	tests,
or	read	more	about	the	types	to	ascertain	greater	clarity.	Even	if	interesting	at
first,	this	can	become	a	rather	frustrating	affair,	as	what	began	with	an
expectation	of	objective	answers	starts	to	feel	more	like	a	wild	goose	chase.	This
may	even	lead	some	folks	to	throw	in	the	towel,	concluding	that	typology	is	not
for	them	or	is	not	worth	the	requisite	time	and	effort.	Others	may	turn	to
alternate	personality	systems,	hoping	to	find	an	easier	or	better	fit.
I	am	no	exception.	The	above	scenario	is	as	much	my	story	as	anyone	else’s.	I
spent	several	years	trying	to	understand	myself	through	a	variety	of	personality
frameworks.	I	studied	Jung,	Myers-Briggs,	Keirsey,	Eysenck,	the	Enneagram,
the	Big	Five,	physiognomy,	and	more.	While	I	found	some	degree	of	truth	and
resonance	in	all	these	approaches,	it	wasn’t	until	I	began	working	with	my
colleague,	Elaine	Schallock,	that	I	came	to	see	the	Jungian	/	Myers-Briggs	model
as	my	clear	favorite.	Schallock’s	insights	into	type	theory,	the	functions,	the
“functional	stack,”	and	the	inferior	function	took	Jung’s	work	to	a	new	level	of
depth,	clarity,	and	applicability.	Through	years	of	discussions	(and	debates)	with
Schallock,	my	perspective	gradually	shifted	from	one	of	typological	relativism
to	one	of	deep	respect	and	appreciation	for	the	Jungian	framework.	I	also	came
to	see	and	understand	my	type	(INTP)	more	vividly	than	ever,	making	it	hard	to
imagine	how	I	could	have	typed	myself	otherwise.
Having	been	transformed	from	a	skeptic	to	an	interpreter	and	advocate	of
Jungian	typology,	I	have	much	that	I	want	to	share	and	explore.	But	before
beginning	our	foray	into	the	nitty-gritty	of	type,	I	would	like	to	briefly	make	the
case	for	why	typology	is	important	and	why	it	is	worth	your	time	and	effort.
Why	It’s	Important	to	Know	Your	Type
For	starters,	knowing	your	type	is	important	because	“being	yourself”	or	“being
true	to	yourself”	seems	to	require	that	you	first	“know	yourself.”	This	seems
especially	true	for	introverts,	many	of	whom	feel	it	necessary	to	understand
themselves	and	clarify	their	identity	before	they	can	authentically	engage	with
the	world.
But	why	is	it	important	to	be	ourselves?	One	reason	is	that	being	ourselves	is
more	satisfying	and	rewarding	than	trying	to	be	someone	we	are	not.	When	we
understand	and	align	with	our	natural	strengths,	we	are	more	apt	to	experience
what	Mihaly	Csikszentmihalyi	has	described	as	“flow.”	Flow	is	a	pleasurable
and	satisfying	state,	involving	a	deep	sense	of	immersion	and	absorption	in	what
we	are	doing.	It	occurs	when	our	minds	have	just	the	right	amount	of	challenge
and	stimulation,	and	when	are	well	suited	to	the	activity.	In	other	words,	flow
results	when	what	we	do	aligns	with	who	we	are.
Because	flow	experiences	are	deeply	rewarding,	we	naturally	seek	them	out.	We
work	to	identify	careers	and	relationships	that	provide	us	with	consistent
opportunities	for	achieving	flow.	But	as	we	discussed	earlier,	modern	life,	with
its	dizzying	number	of	options	and	possibilities,	can	leave	us	feeling	ambivalent
or	paralyzed	by	indecision.	While	we	may	have	an	implicit	sense	of	who	we	are
and	what	we	are	good	at,	it	can	still	be	overwhelming	to	make	big	decisions
regarding	our	careers,	relationships,	and	so	on.	It	is	here	where	typology	can	step
in	and	provide	helpful	guidance	and	insight.
By	identifying	our	type,	we	can	know	what	type	of	person	we	are	and	from
which	mold	we	were	cast.	Like	the	acorn	destined	to	become	an	oak,	each
personality	type	is	designed	to	follow	a	given	path,	even	if	wide	enough	to	allow
for	individual	variations	along	the	way.	By	understanding	our	type,	as	well	as	its
prospective	course	of	growth	and	development,	we	become	more	consciously
aware	of	what	it	means	to	“be”	and	“become”	our	true,	authentic	selves.
Knowing	and	understanding	our	type	also	carries	certain	moral	implications.
One	could	certainly	argue,	as	Socrates	famously	did,	that	self-knowledge	is
foundational	to	the	well-lived,	virtuous	life.	One	might	also	suggest	that	a	lack
of	self-knowledge,	or	what	we	might	call	self-ignorance,	is	equally,	if	not	more
dangerous	than	other	forms	of	ignorance.	Fortunately,	typology	can	illuminate
aspects	of	ourselves	we	might	otherwise	be	blind	to.	It	can	reveal	deep
psychological	patterns	and	structures	that	furtively	influence	our	thoughts,
attitudes,	and	behaviors.	And	with	this	awareness	comes	the	freedom	to	shake
loose	from	the	trappings	and	shackles	of	less	optimal	patterns.
Not	only	can	knowing	our	type	contribute	to	our	psychological	health	and
growth	as	individuals,	but	it	can	also	enhance	our	collective	health	and	well-
being.	Just	as	the	parts	of	a	healthy	body	work	together	in	a	unified	way,	a
healthy	society	requires	that	all	personality	types	function	optimally	and	utilize
their	natural	strengths.	Equally	important,	typology	helps	us	understand	why
others	may	think	and	behave	differently	than	we	do.	By	understanding	why
others	think	and	behave	as	they	do,	we	can	more	readily	appreciate	them	for	who
they	are,	thereby	diminishing	the	urge	to	criticize	or	change	them	into	something
they	are	not.
What	is	a	Personality	Type?
I	love	illustrating	typological	concepts	with	analogies.	Analogies	allow	us	to	use
familiar	or	commonplace	ideas	to	understand	more	obscure	or	less	familiar	ones.
I	would	therefore	like	to	begin	this	section	by	suggesting	that	personality	types
are	a	lot	like	trees.
Most	people	aren’t	so	brave	as	to	deny	the	existence	of	different	types	of	trees.
An	oak	tree,	for	instance,	clearly	displays	characteristics	that	distinguish	it	from
other	types	of	trees.	Likewise,	it	is	hard	to	deny	the	reality	of	different
personality	types.	Just	as	oaks	are	inherently	different	from	cherries,	so	it	is	with
ENFJs,	INFPs,	ISTPs,	etc.
Taking	our	analogy	one	step	further,	just	as	oak	trees	do	not	change	into	cherry
trees,	I	will	argue	that	our	essential	personality	type	is	unlikely	to	change	over
time.	Since	our	type	and	its	features	(preferences,	functions,	etc.)	are	part	of	the
core	framework	of	our	personality,	they	are	too	deep	and	too	fundamental	to
undergo	significant	modification.	In	this	respect,	a	personality	type	is	similar	to
the	foundation	of	a	house.	While	a	house	may	undergo	any	number	of	revisions
and	improvements,	its	foundation	and	basic	structure	are	typically	left
unaffected.
With	that	said,	there	are	less	foundational	aspects	of	our	personality	that	can	and
do	change	over	time.	If	this	were	not	the	case,	personal	growth	would	not	be
possible.	Just	as	we	make	improvements	and	modifications	to	our	homes,	our
personality	grows	and	develops	across	the	lifespan.	I	discuss	the	process	and
phases	of	type	development	in	my	recent	book,	The	16	Personality	Types.
It	is	also	important	to	recognize	the	collective	aspect	of	type.	After	all,	the	very
notion	of	types	could	have	never	arisen	if	we	looked	only	at	ourselves.	Nor
could	it	have	emerged	if	we	viewed	each	individual	as	entirely	unique.	To	the
contrary,	the	notion	of	types	developed	from	the	recognition	that	people	display
patterns	of	thought,	attitude,	and	behavior	that	are	similar	to	those	of	some
people,	while	differing	from	those	of	others.	Hence,	typology	is	at	once	an
individual	and	collective	enterprise.
Finally,	I	would	like	to	mention	a	parallel	between	typology	and	physics.
Namely,	the	psychological	laws	and	patterns	of	human	behavior	are	in	many
ways	comparable	to	the	physical	laws	of	the	universe.	The	basic	premise	of
typology	is	that	human	behavior,	like	the	physical	universe,	is	fashioned
according	to	recurring	structures	and	predictable	laws	that	can	be	rationally
discerned	and	described.	This	links	up	with	what	we	discussed	earlier	about	the
objective	nature	of	typology.	So	just	as	physicists	study	the	physical	universe
objectively,	typologists	work	to	objectively	map	the	human	psyche.
A	Brief	History	of	Type
In	his	1913	classic,	Psychological	Types,	Carl	Jung	propounded	the	basic
theoretical	framework	for	what	is	now	the	most	popular	personality	system	in
the	world.	Most	remarkably,	Jung	did	not	rely	on	formal	research	methods	in
developing	his	theory	of	the	types.	Nor	did	he	develop	or	utilize	formal
assessments	for	the	sake	of	type	identification.	Instead,	Jung	relied	largely	on	his
own	powers	of	observation	and	insight	in	both	developing	his	theories	and
identifying	individuals	of	various	types.
Although	Jung	spoke	generally	of	introverts	and	extraverts,	he	eventually
delineated	eight	psychological	functions	(Ni,	Ne,	Si,	Se,	Ti,	Te,	Fi,	Fe)	as	a	more
accurate	means	of	understanding	the	types.	More	specifically,	he	focused	on
identifying	an	individual’s	dominant	function,	as	well	as,	to	a	lesser	extent,	the
auxiliary	function.
Because	Jung	never	developed	a	standardized	personality	assessment	tool,	his
ideas	were	slow	to	catch	on	among	the	general	public.	It	was	not	until	Isabel
Myers	and	her	mother,	Katherine	Briggs,	entered	the	scene	that	Jung’s	theory
began	its	ascendance	toward	widespread	recognition.	Myers	and	Briggs
developed	the	Myers-Briggs	Type	Indicator®,	or	what	is	commonly	known	as
the	MBTI®,	as	a	way	of	applying	and	popularizing	Jung’s	ideas.
While	Jung	spoke	mostly	in	terms	of	a	type’s	preferred	functions	(e.g.	Ni,	Se),
Myers	and	Briggs	introduced	and	emphasized	the	notion	of	preferences	(i.e.,	E,
I,	S,	N,	T,	F,	J,	P).	Although	still	rooted	in	Jung’s	theory,	Myers	and	Briggs	likely
saw	the	preferences	as	more	amenable	to	objective	assessment	than	Jung’s	multi-
dimensional	functions.	Despite	the	different	emphases	of	a	preference	versus
function-based	approach,	these	two	approaches	can	and	arguably	should	be	used
in	tandem.
In	many	respects,	Myers	and	Briggs	were	correct	in	seeing	the	preference-based
approach	as	more	user-friendly,	since	it	is	more	easily	comprehended	and
requires	less	background	knowledge.	However,	individuals	seeking	a	deeper
understanding	of	themselves	and	their	personality	type	must	eventually	dive	into
the	functions.	This	book	will	incorporate	both	approaches,	exploring	the	typing
process	from	the	perspective	of	the	Myers-Briggs	preferences	as	well	as	the
Jungian	functions.
More	recent	advances	in	type	theory	have	highlighted	the	importance	of
understanding	the	less	conscious	functions,	particularly	the	inferior	function,
which	we	will	soon	discuss.	This	can	be	seen	in	Marie-Louise	Von	Franz’s
exploration	of	the	inferior	function	in	Jung’s	Typology	(1971),	as	well	as	in
Naomi	Quenk’s	1993	book,	Beside	Ourselves,	later	renamed,	Was	That	Really
Me?	
For	the	last	decade	or	so,	Elaine	Schallock	and	I	have	continued	to	refine	and
advance	type	theory,	including	intensive	explorations	of	the	preferences,
functions,	inferior	function,	function	pairs,	and	functional	stack.	All	of	these
elements	will	be	enumerated	in	this	book,	providing	you	with	the	most	up-to-
date	information	for	accurately	identifying	and	understanding	your	personality
type.
The	Preferences
According	to	Myers	and	Briggs,	each	personality	type	has	four	basic
preferences,	with	each	type	preferring	either	introversion	(I)	or	extraversion	(E),
sensing	(S)	or	intuition	(N),	thinking	(T)	or	feeling	(F),	and	judging	(J)	or
perceiving	(P).
For	example,	INFJs	prefer	I,	N,	F,	and	J	more	than	E,	S,	T,	and	P.	This	does	not
mean	that	INFJs	never	utilize	E,	S,	T,	or	P,	but	when	given	the	chance,	they
prefer	to	use	I,	N,	F,	or	J.
To	illustrate	what	a	personality	preference	is,	I	like	to	compare	it	hand
dominance.	As	we	all	know,	a	right-handed	person	will	prefer	to	use	her	right
hand	for	the	majority	of	tasks,	especially	those	requiring	fine	motor	skills,	such
as	writing.	This	of	course	doesn’t	mean	that	she	never	uses	her	left	hand,	but
only	that	it	tends	to	play	more	of	a	supportive,	rather	than	a	dominant	or	leading,
role.
The	same	is	true	for	our	personality	preferences.	While	we	may	at	times	use	our
non-dominant	preferences,	in	most	situations	we	prefer	to	lead	with	our
dominant	ones.	Not	only	does	this	feel	more	comfortable	and	natural,	but
typically	produces	better	results.	We	will	explore	each	of	the	eight	preferences	in
greater	detail	in	upcoming	chapters.
The	Functions
Of	the	eight	preferences,	four	of	them—sensing,	intuition,	thinking,	and	feeling
—also	double	as	functions.	Extraversion	and	introversion	do	not	qualify	as
functions	because,	according	to	Jung,	they	primarily	represent	our	preferred
direction	of	energy	and	attention.	Extraverts	direct	their	energy	and	attention
outwardly,	toward	people,	objects,	events,	possibilities,	etc.	Introverts,	by
contrast,	direct	their	focus	inwardly,	toward	themselves—their	own	thoughts,
feelings,	intuitions,	sensations,	etc.
Not	only	did	Jung	believe	that	individuals	were	characteristically	introverted	or
extraverted,	but	also	that	each	function	assumes	an	introverted	or	extraverted
direction.	Thus,	when	S,	N,	T,	and	F	are	directed	inwardly	(I)	or	outwardly	(E),
we	end	up	with	eight	functions	(Si,	Se,	Ni,	Ne,	Ti,	Te,	Fi,	Fe).
But	what	about	judging	and	perceiving?	Why	aren’t	they	considered	functions?
The	answer	is	they	do	play	a	role	in	the	functions,	only	less	explicitly.	Namely,
sensing	and	intuition	are	considered	to	be	perceiving	functions.	They	are	in
charge	of	absorbing,	extracting,	retaining,	or	synthesizing	information.	Thinking
and	feeling	are	judging	functions.	Their	purpose	is	to	evaluate	information	and
make	decisions	that	contribute	to	structure,	order,	and	predictability.	Hence,	the
eight	functions	can	be	subdivided	into	perceiving	and	judging	functions	as
follows:
The	Judging	Functions:
Introverted	Thinking	(Ti)
Extraverted	Thinking	(Te)
Introverted	Feeling	(Fi)
Extraverted	Feeling	(Fe)
The	Perceiving	Functions:
Introverted	Sensing	(Si)
Extraverted	Sensing	(Se)
Introverted	Intuition	(Ni)
Extraverted	Intuition	(Ne)
We	will	examine	each	of	these	functions	in	greater	detail	in	future	chapters.
The	Functional	Stack
Each	personality	type	uses	four	functions	that	comprise	its	functional	stack.
These	functions	are	ordered	according	to	their	relative	degree	of	strength	and
development,	as	well	as	their	availability	for	conscious	employment.	The	most
developed	and	conscious	function	is	called	the	“dominant	function,”	which	is
followed	by	the	auxiliary,	tertiary,	and	inferior	functions	respectively.
The	dominant	function	represents	the	core	strength	and	defining	characteristic	of
each	type.	When	engrossed	in	an	activity	that	fully	engages	the	dominant
function,	we	tend	to	feel	alert	and	alive,	doing	what	we	were	“born	to	do.”	The
auxiliary	function,	which	can	also	be	useful	and	readily	developed,	might	be
viewed	as	the	co-pilot	or	sidekick	to	the	dominant.	Falling	toward	the	bottom	of
the	functional	stack,	the	tertiary	and	inferior	are	less	conscious	and	developed
than	the	top	two	functions.	However	diminutive	their	conscious	presence,	the
less	conscious	functions	play	an	important	role	in	each	type's	personality
dynamics.
Dominant	Function:	“The	Captain”;	the	signature	tool	and	strength	of	the
personality	type
Auxiliary	Function:	“The	Sidekick”;	chief	assistant	to	the	dominant	function
Tertiary	Function:	“The	Adolescent”;	relatively	unconscious	and	undeveloped
Inferior	Function:	“The	Child”;	the	least	conscious	and	developed	of	the	four
functions
Here	is	the	INTP's	functional	stack,	which	we’ll	use	as	an	example:
Dominant	Function:	Introverted	Thinking	(Ti)
Auxiliary	Function:	Extraverted	Intuition	(Ne)
Tertiary	Function:	Introverted	Sensing	(Si)
Inferior	Function:	Extraverted	Feeling	(Fe)
In	considering	the	INTP's	functional	stack,	you	may	have	noticed	something
curious.	Namely,	INTPs	(and	all	other	types	for	that	matter)	use	a	thinking,
feeling,	sensing,	and	intuiting	function.	This	may	be	a	bit	confusing	at	first,	since
there	is	no	indication	of	sensing	(S)	or	feeling	(F)	in	their	I,	N,	T,	or	P
preferences.	If	you	look	carefully,	however,	you	will	notice	that	their	S	and	F
functions	are	situated	below	their	T	and	N	functions.	This	tells	us	that	INTPs
prefer	to	use	T	and	N	(or	more	specifically	Ti	and	Ne)	more	than	S	(i.e.,	Si)	or	F
(i.e.,	Fe).	See	Appendix	II	to	view	the	functional	stacks	of	all	the	personality
types.
J-P	Criteria
Observant	readers	may	have	noticed	another	curious	fact	about	INTPs'
functional	stack,	namely,	that	despite	their	status	as	a	P	type,	their	dominant
function	(Ti)	is	actually	a	judging	function.	The	other	IP	types	(i.e.,	ISTP,	INFP,
ISFP)	also	employ	a	dominant	judging	function	(Ti	or	Fi).	The	situation	is
reversed	for	IJs	(i.e.,	INTJ,	ISTJ,	INFJ,	ISFJ),	who	use	a	dominant	perceiving
function	(Ni	or	Si).	This	of	course	makes	things	more	complicated	when	it
comes	to	understanding	IPs	and	IJs	as	judgers	versus	perceivers.	Although	we
will	reserve	further	discussion	of	this	issue	until	Chapter	6	and	Chapter	16,	at
this	point,	you	should	work	to	familiarize	yourself	with	the	following	J-P
criteria:
1.	A	given	type’s	J-P	designation	(i.e.,	the	fourth	letter	of	the	type)	refers	largely
to	its	outer	(i.e.,	extraverted)	presentation.	Hence,	J	types	will	extravert	a	judging
attitude	(firm,	decisive,	opinionated,	etc.),	while	P	types	will	display	a	perceiving
attitude	(open,	flexible,	receptive,	etc.).
2.	For	extraverts,	the	nature	of	the	dominant	function	(i.e.,	its	status	as	a	judging
or	perceiving	function)	matches	their	J-P	designation.	For	example,	ENTPs'
dominant	function,	Ne,	is	a	perceiving	function	and	ENTJs’	dominant	function,
Te,	is	a	judging	function.
3.	For	introverts,	things	are	more	confusing,	since	the	nature	of	their	dominant
function	opposes	their	J-P	designation.	We	saw	this	with	INTPs	above.	Namely,
despite	being	classified	as	a	P	type,	INTPs’	dominant	function	(Ti)	is	a	judging
function.	To	understand	why	INTPs	and	other	IPs	are	considered	P	rather	than	J
types,	see	"rule"	number	one	above.
4.	In	light	of	the	above,	we	can	make	the	following	associations	between	the
functions	and	preferences	of	the	various	types:
Si	=	SJ	types	(i.e.,	Si	used	as	the	dominant	or	auxiliary)
Se	=	SP	types
Ni	=	NJ	types
Ne	=	NP	types
Ti	=	TP	types
Te	=	TJ	types
Fi	=	FP	types
Fe	=	FJ	types
Purpose	&	Overview
The	chief	purpose	of	this	book	is	to	equip	you	with	the	knowledge	necessary	to
clarify	and	better	understand	your	personality	type.	In	conjunction	with	the
information	presented	in	The	16	Personality	Types,	it	strives	to	deepen	your
understanding	of	the	essential	features	of	your	personality	type,	including	your
preferences,	functions,	and	functional	stack.
To	combat	the	inherent	challenges	of	personality	typing,	Part	I	lays	some
preliminary	groundwork	for	the	typing	process.
Chapter	1	explores	some	of	the	common	barriers	and	roadblocks	to	effective
typing,	including	the	confounding	effects	of	“nurture,”	personality	development,
and	the	inferior	function.	It	also	touches	on	the	shortcomings	of	personality	tests
with	respect	to	accurate	type	diagnosis.
In	Chapter	2,	we	consider	numerous	tips	strategies,	both	general	and	specific,	for
effective	personality	typing.	These	strategies	will	prove	useful	as	you	move
through	the	remainder	of	the	book,	helping	you	further	refine	and	clarify	your
typological	understanding.
Part	II	(Chapters	3-6)	takes	a	careful	look	at	the	nature	and	typing	criteria	for
each	of	the	eight	preferences:	introversion	(I),	extraversion	(E),	sensing	(S),
intuition	(N),	thinking	(T),	feeling	(F),	judging	(J),	and	perceiving	(P).	Toward
the	end	of	each	chapter,	we	will	explore	some	common	typing	pitfalls,	or
"mistypings,"	such	as	why	an	introvert	might	misclassify	as	an	extravert,	or	vice-
versa.
Building	on	Part	II,	Part	III	(Chapters	7-15)	entails	an	in-depth	survey	of	the
eight	functions:	Introverted	Intuition	(Ni),	Extraverted	Intuition	(Ne),	Introverted
Sensing	(Si),	Extraverted	Sensing	(Se),	Introverted	Thinking	(Ti),	Extraverted
Thinking	(Te),	Introverted	Feeling	(Fi),	and	Extraverted	Feeling	(Fe).	In	addition
to	carefully	describing	the	nature	and	presentation	of	each	of	the	functions,	we
will	explore	recent	neuroscientific	research	detailing	their	association	with
specific	brain	regions	and	states	of	neurological	activity.
In	Part	IV	(Chapter	16),	we	dive	even	deeper	into	the	types,	examining	how	the
structuring	of	the	functional	stack	reveals	important	and	commonly	overlooked
similarities	between	EJs	and	IPs,	as	well	as	EPs	and	IJs.	While	adding	a	layer	of
theoretical	complexity	and	nuance,	it	should	nonetheless	prove	useful	for	further
clarifying	and	understanding	your	type.	This	chapter	also	summarizes	some	of
the	essential	characteristics	of	EPs,	EJs,	IPs,	and	IJs,	including	touching	on
issues	related	to	their	respective	inferior	functions.
Part	I:	Effective	Typing:	Barriers	&
Strategies
1.	Barriers	to	Effective	Typing
Since	identifying	our	true	type	is	rarely	as	simple	or	straightforward	as	it	seems,
it	is	important	to	consider	potential	barriers	or	roadblocks	to	accurate	typing.
This	will	comprise	our	aim	in	this	chapter.	Specifically,	we	will	consider	the
confounding	role	of	nurture,	personality	development,	and	the	inferior	function
in	type	identification.	We	will	also	touch	on	some	potential	shortcomings	of
personality	tests	with	regard	to	accurate	type	diagnosis.
The	Confounding	Role	of	Nurture
One	of	the	major	barriers	to	accurate	typing	involves	the	confounding	effects	of
“nurture.”	By	nurture,	I	am	referring	to	the	cumulative	effects	of	past	and	present
circumstances—culture,	family,	childhood,	etc.—on	our	personality.
Generally	speaking,	typology	tells	us	much	about	the	“nature”	side	of	our
personality,	or	what	we	might	think	of	as	our	psychological	DNA.	It	tells	us	very
little,	however,	about	the	effects	of	nurture.	So	if	we	are	willing	to	grant	nature
and	nurture	their	respective	contributions	to	the	big	picture	of	personality,	which
I	think	is	entirely	reasonable,	we	must	conclude	that	typology	is	limited	in	its
capacity	to	predict	or	explain	the	totality	of	our	personality.
Although	nurture	does	not	change	our	basic	personality	type,	it	can	in	some
ways	cloud	or	impair	our	ability	to	accurately	perceive	our	true	type.	Imagine,
for	instance,	an	extravert	raised	as	an	only	child	in	a	rural	area,	with	no	one	but
her	parents	to	talk	to.	Such	a	child	would	seem	far	more	likely	to	develop	her
introverted	capacities	than	one	raised	with	multiple	siblings,	which	may	in	turn
compromise	her	ability	to	grasp	her	true	status	as	an	extravert.
Jobs	and	careers	may	also	leave	their	mark	on	our	personality,	as	well	as	our
perceptions	of	it.	For	example,	working	a	highly	structured	job	with	predefined
hours	might	cause	perceiving	types	to	resemble	or	see	themselves	as	judgers.
Similarly,	unstructured	work	might	lead	judgers	to	fancy	themselves	perceivers.
In	light	of	these	examples,	accurate	typing	requires	that	we	effectively
distinguish	between	nature	(i.e.,	our	true	type)	and	nurture	(i.e.,	the	conditioned
features	overlaying	and	interlacing	with	our	type).	At	minimum,	this	involves
being	able	to	distance	ourselves	from	our	present	circumstances	in	order	to	better
grasp	the	larger,	historical	picture	of	our	type.
Personality	Development
Our	level	of	personal	growth,	or	what	is	sometimes	called	“type	development,”
can	also	impact	our	ability	to	clearly	recognize	our	type.	In	The	16	Personality
Types,	I	discuss	the	three	phases	of	type	development	for	each	of	the	personality
types.	Of	these	phases,	Phase	II	is	the	most	likely	to	derail	our	attempts	at	type
diagnosis.
Phase	II	begins	in	late	childhood	and,	for	some	people,	may	continue	for
decades.	As	the	pressures	and	responsibilities	involved	with	transitioning	to
adulthood	grow	more	pronounced,	we	often	experience	a	commensurate	spike	in
identity	confusion,	and	with	it,	type	confusion.	Further	complicating	matters,
Phase	II	also	entails	a	struggle	for	ascendancy	between	the	dominant	and	inferior
function.	In	short,	because	so	much	is	happening	in	Phase	II,	both	internally	and
externally,	identity	confusion	and	type	confusion	are	commonplace.
The	Inferior	Function
In	the	previous	chapter,	we	learned	that	the	dominant	function	represents	a	type’s
signature	strength.	While	the	dominant	is	the	most	conscious	and	well-developed
of	the	functions,	the	mostly	unconscious	inferior	function	is	in	many	respects	its
“other	half.”	Put	together,	they	comprise	a	functional	whole.	And	because	the
psyche	desperately	wants	to	be	whole,	all	types	are	inclined	to	pursue,	and	to
some	degree	identify	with,	their	inferior	function.
The	reputed	“opposite”	of	the	dominant	function,	the	inferior	represents	a	new
and	exciting	mode	of	existence.	It	is	commonly	experienced	and	described	as
intensely	pleasurable,	even	magical.	For	example,	when	a	thinking	type	with
inferior	feeling	experiences	powerful	feelings	of	love	or	infatuation,	he	may	feel
he’s	been	transported	to	a	whole	new	world.	Dominant	feelers	may	experience
something	similar	in	moments	of	logical	clarity.
Because	of	the	power	and	allure	of	the	inferior	function,	it	contributes	to	no
small	amount	of	identity	and	type	confusion.	Indeed,	for	many	of	us,	it	is	only
after	exploring	and	experimenting	with	the	inferior	function	that	we	come	to
clearly	recognize	(or	remember)	who	we	really	are	(i.e.,	to	accurately	identify
our	dominant	function).	In	this	sense,	we	are	like	children	who	must	make
mistakes	to	“learn	our	lessons.”	We	must	toy	with,	and	even	get	burned	by,	the
inferior	before	we	remember	and	acknowledge	our	primary	strength.	And
because	most	people	have	never	even	heard	of	the	inferior	function,	it	stands	as
one	of	the	most	insidious	and	overlooked	sources	of	type	confusion.
Shortcomings	of	Personality	Assessments
Among	the	more	common	methods	of	type	assessment	is	administering	self-
report	questionnaires	or	“personality	tests.”	One	of	the	more	alluring	features	of
personality	tests	is	they	provide	a	quick	and	objective	result.	Simply	check	some
boxes,	tabulate	the	results,	and	“whoala!”	we	have	a	type!	Unfortunately,	the
effects	of	nurture,	circumstances,	personality	development,	the	inferior	function,
and	other	factors	may	combine	to	create	confusion	in	test	responses.	Clearly,
there	is	a	glut	of	information	test-takers	must	sort	through	as	they	go	about
formulating	their	responses.
Making	matters	worse,	personality	tests	themselves	are	far	from	perfect.	Test-
takers	often	feel	that	certain	test	items	are	unclear,	misleading	or	confusing.	Test
items	may	also	fail	to	measure	the	personality	traits	that	most	effectively
represent	or	relate	to	one’s	type.	Some	questions	may	assess	traits	that	vary
widely	among	individuals	of	the	same	personality	type.	We	encounter	a	similar
problem	in	many	descriptions	and	profiles	of	the	types.	Namely,	when	essential
information	is	omitted,	or	non-essential	information	included,	type	confusion	is
bound	to	arise.
2.	Strategies	for	Accurate	Typing
In	light	of	the	previous	chapter,	it	is	clear	that	plenty	can	go	wrong	in	the	process
of	discerning	our	type.	In	recognition	of	this	sobering	reality,	I	wished	to	start
this	chapter	by	suggesting	that	there	are	no	magic	bullets	for	identifying	your
type.	While	we	like	to	think	that	personality	tests	are,	or	could	feasibly	be,	magic
bullets,	they	are	really	just	a	piece	of	a	larger	typing	process.	Identifying	and
understanding	your	type	is	best	done	through	a	multi-pronged	approach,
involving	an	ongoing	process	of	learning,	understanding,	and	insight.
A	key	element	of	the	typing	process	is	understanding	the	personality	framework
—the	preferences,	functions,	functional	stack,	and	so	on.	Equally	critical	is
accurately	assessing	and	understanding	yourself	in	light	of	that	framework.	As
you	explore	and	engage	with	the	framework	and	its	concepts,	you	will	become
aware	of	things	you	never	noticed	or	understood	about	yourself.	It	is	only	by
working	to	understand	the	framework,	as	well	as	your	personality	in	light	of	the
framework,	that	a	deeper	understanding	of	your	type	will	emerge.
To	facilitate	this	process,	you	will	want	to	take	a	few	personality	tests,	such	as
the	Type	Clarifier	(Appendix	I),	the	MBTI,	or	other	tests	on	Personality	Junkie.
You	will	also	want	to	explore	some	type	descriptions,	or	what	are	commonly
called	“type	profiles,”	such	as	those	included	in	The	16	Personality	Types.	The
problem	with	many	type	profiles	is	they	provide	rather	generic	descriptions	of
the	types	based	on	a	cursory	understanding	of	the	preferences.	And	it	can	be
difficult	to	confidently	identify	your	personality	type	without	also	having	a
working	knowledge	of	the	functions.
Let’s	say,	for	instance,	you	are	working	to	decide	whether	you	are	an	INFJ	or	an
INFP.	While	these	two	types	may	seem	rather	similar	at	first	glance,	sharing
three	of	four	preferences,	they	actually	share	NONE	of	the	same	functions.	This
contributes	to	substantial	differences	between	these	two	types	that	may	well	be
missed	if	thinking	only	in	terms	of	the	preferences.
Another	typing	strategy	involves	asking	a	perceptive	friend,	family	member,
counselor,	or	type	practitioner	to	discuss	your	personality	with	you.	They	can
offer	you	an	outsider’s	perspective,	which	you	can	then	compare	and	contrast
with	your	own	observations.	Since	extraverts	are	disposed	to	looking	outward
before	looking	inward,	they	may	find	input	from	others	particularly	helpful	and
reassuring.
The	above	strategies—understanding	the	personality	framework,	taking
personality	assessments,	exploring	type	profiles,	self-reflection,	and	discussing
your	personality	with	others—are	the	“bread	and	butter”	methods	of	identifying
your	true	type.	For	the	remainder	of	this	chapter,	we	will	explore	some
additional	strategies	that	can	help	you	clarify	your	type.
Explore	Childhood	Patterns
Adulthood	brings	demands	and	pressures	that	may	obscure	our	type’s	natural
tendencies	and	preferences.	Introverts,	for	instance,	may	view	it	practically
necessary	to	routinely	engage	with	others	in	the	workplace,	which	over	time,
could	feasibly	lead	them	to	lose	sight	of	their	true	preference.
To	prevent	our	self-appraisals	from	being	skewed	by	current	circumstances,	it
can	be	helpful	to	reflect	on	your	childhood	attitudes	and	behaviors,	particularly
those	exhibited	in	times	of	leisure	(e.g.,	summer	break).
In	reflecting	on	my	childhood,	for	instance,	I	remember	having	an	early	love	for
words,	language,	and	word	patterns.	Throughout	my	elementary	school	years,	I
took	great	pride	in	maintaining	a	running	list	of	homophones	(okay,	so	I’ve
always	been	a	bit	nerdy!).	I	also	enjoyed	making	puns	(still	do),	writing
limericks,	and	playing	word	games	with	my	mother.	Looking	back,	my	interest
in	language,	including	its	underlying	structure	and	patterns,	was	an	early	clue	to
my	status	as	an	intuitive	type.
As	you	study	the	preferences	and	functions	in	the	upcoming	chapters,	I
encourage	you	to	consider	how	each	may	(or	may	not)	have	been	evident	in	your
childhood.
Which	Type(s)	are	You	Least	Like?
While	it	is	normal	to	focus	the	lion’s	share	of	your	attention	on	the	personality
types	that	describe	you	best,	it	can	also	be	useful	to	do	the	opposite—to	consider
which	types	resemble	you	the	least.
As	an	exercise,	consider	making	a	list	of	three	or	four	personality	types	that	best
describe	your	personality.	From	those,	select	the	one	that	is	least	like	you.	If
your	selection	happens	to	be	an	extraverted	type,	this	may	help	confirm	your
status	as	an	introvert,	if	a	sensing	type,	it	may	confirm	your	status	as	an	intuitive,
and	so	on.
An	INTP	friend	of	mine,	for	example,	was	confident	in	his	status	as	an	NT	type.
However,	he	was	unsure	whether	he	was	an	INTP,	ENTP,	or	INTJ.	From	this,	it
was	clear	that,	of	the	four	NT	types,	he	was	least	like	the	ENTJ.	This	indirectly
suggested	that	he	was	both	an	introvert	and	a	perceiver,	which	ultimately	helped
him	clarify	his	status	as	an	INTP.
Which	Function(s)	Do	You	Use	the	Least?
A	similar	approach	can	be	used	with	the	functions,	in	which	you	work	to	identify
your	least	used	functions.
For	example,	the	Extraverted	Feeling	(Fe)	and	Extraverted	Thinking	(Te)
functions	often	present	as	bold,	opinionated,	and	forceful,	especially	when	used
as	a	type’s	dominant	function.	So	if	you	were	to	see	these	traits	as	largely
uncharacteristic	of	your	historical	personality,	Introverted	Feeling	(Fi)	or
Introverted	Thinking	(Ti)	could	well	be	your	dominant	function.
What	is	Your	Enantiodromia?
The	central	psychological	challenge	for	each	personality	type	involves
effectively	resolving	the	ongoing	tug-of-war	between	its	dominant	and	inferior
functions.	Jung	introduced	the	term	enantiodromia	to	describe	this	struggle	of
psychic	opposites.
For	instance,	both	ESPs	and	INJs	must	navigate	persistent	tensions	between	Se
and	Ni,	between	broad	external	sensory	perception	(Se)	and	intensive	inner
intuition	(Ni).	With	regard	to	typing,	the	idea	here	would	be	to	think	of	each
type’s	dominant	and	inferior	functions	as	pairs,	or	what	I	like	to	call	“function
pairs.”	Hence,	both	ESPs’	and	INJs’	chief	psychological	struggle	will	involve	the
Ni-Se	(or,	if	you	prefer,	Se-Ni)	function	pair.
So	let’s	say	you’re	trying	to	decide	whether	you’re	an	INFJ	or	an	ENFJ.	Since
both	of	these	types	use	the	same	four	functions,	only	in	a	different	order,	you
might	ask	yourself	which	function	pair	you	wrestle	with	the	most.	For	INFJs
(and	INTJs),	the	answer	would	likely	be	the	Ni-Se	function	pair.	For	ENFJs	(and
ESFJs),	it	is	apt	to	be	the	Fe-Ti	function	pair.	We	will	explore	each	of	the	four
function	pairs	(i.e.,	Te-Fi,	Fe-Ti,	Se-Ni,	Ne-Si)	in	upcoming	chapters.
Put	Inconsistencies	in	Perspective
If	you’re	like	most	people,	you	have	probably	encountered	some	incongruities
between	your	own	self-perceptions	and	the	way	your	personality	type	is
described.	This	can	relate	to	a	number	of	factors,	including	the	relative	ordering
of	the	functions	in	the	functional	stack.	For	instance,	if	you	are	an	ISFP	and
Extraverted	Sensing	(Se)	is	your	auxiliary	function,	your	Se	may	be	tempered	by
your	overall	status	as	an	introvert.	Hence,	you	may	fail	to	identify	with	the	more
pronounced	Se	characteristics	displayed	by	ESPs.	This	does	not	mean	you	are
not	an	ISFP	or	that	you	do	not	use	Se,	but	only	that	your	introversion	may	be
limiting	the	extremity	of	your	extraverted	functions.
Furthermore,	because	reality	does	not	always	align	with	our	perceptions	of	it,	the
typing	process	requires	some	willingness	to	accept	that,	despite	ostensible
exceptions	or	inconsistencies,	general	psychological	laws	and	patterns	are
nevertheless	at	work.	For	certain	individuals,	especially	P	types,	this	can	be	a	tall
order.	It	can,	after	all,	be	difficult	to	accept	something	that	deviates	from	our
personal	experiences	or	perceptions.	But	just	as	we	don’t	personally	experience
the	world	as	round,	there	are	times	when	we	must	rely	on	more	objective	tools
and	methods	(e.g.,	satellite	images)	to	provide	a	more	accurate	and
comprehensive	picture	of	reality.	So	while	you	may	at	times	find	it	difficult	to
see	your	type	through	a	wall	of	apparent	inconsistencies,	this	doesn’t	mean	that
types	don’t	exist	or	that	you	won’t	eventually	come	to	see	your	own	type	more
clearly.
It	is	probably	worth	reiterating	that	typology	looks	at	general	patterns
manifesting	across	the	population.	At	the	population	level,	individual	differences
fade	and	general	similarities	(and	differences)	come	to	the	fore.	Through	the
process	of	zooming	out,	variations	and	anomalies	are	lost	or	blurred,	leaving	us
with	general	patterns	and	outlines.	It	is	these	general	patterns—constituting	the
types,	preferences,	functions,	etc.—that	are	most	important	and	foundational	to
personality	typology.
Avoid	Over-Focusing	on	Particulars
Related	to	the	act	of	zooming	out	is	avoiding	over-focusing	on	any	specific	trait
or	detail	of	your	personality.	For	instance,	it	is	dubious	to	assume	that	being
talkative	automatically	qualifies	you	as	an	extravert.	Due	to	the	myriad
complexities	and	confounding	factors	at	play	in	personality,	placing	too	much
emphasis	on	any	one	trait	can	easily	lead	you	astray.
The	trick	in	determining	your	type	is	to	take	the	totality	of	what	you	know	about
your	personality	and	work	to	discern	its	underlying	structure	(i.e.,	type).	I	realize
this	is	easier	said	than	done,	particularly	for	sensing	types,	who	are	naturally
more	attuned	to	specifics	and	details	than	underlying	patterns.	Truth	be	told,
INJs	are	probably	the	types	best	suited	for	apprehending	these	sorts	of	deep
patterns.	Hence,	consulting	with	an	INJ,	especially	an	INFJ,	may	prove	helpful
for	synthesizing	and	making	sense	of	the	various	elements	of	your	personality,
thereby	clarifying	your	true	type.
Part	II:	Clarifying	Your	Preferences
As	we	saw	in	the	Introduction,	one	approach	to	discerning	your	personality	type
is	to	identify	your	four	preferences	(i.e.,	E	or	I,	S	or	N,	T	or	F,	J	or	P).
One	question	I	frequently	encounter	with	respect	to	the	preferences	is	whether	it
is	possible	to	sit	on	the	fence	between	two	preferences;	that	is,	to	have	no	real
preference	at	all.	If	you’ve	spent	time	perusing	typology	forums	online,	you	may
have	noticed	people	inserting	an	“x”	in	place	of	one	or	two	letters	of	their	type
(e.g.,	ExFP),	suggesting	they	have	adopted	this	line	of	thinking.	Although	this
practice	seems	reasonable	if	one	remains	unclear	as	to	his	or	her	true	type,	the
notion	of	not	having	a	preference	is	dubious	from	the	perspective	of	type	theory.
The	problem	with	the	notorious	“x”	is	that	it	not	only	implies	a	lack	of	clarity
with	respect	to	one’s	preferences,	but	also	one’s	functions.	For	instance,	typing
oneself	as	an	IxFJ	not	only	denotes	S-N	ambivalence,	but	also	uncertainty	with
regard	to	using	the	Si-Ne	function	pair	versus	the	Ni-Se	function	pair.	In	my
view,	a	lack	of	clarity	in	all	these	areas	suggests	either	a	deficit	in	self-
knowledge	or	a	lack	of	insight	into	the	preferences	and	functions.	If	type	is	the
deep	psychological	structure	we	believe	it	to	be,	the	idea	that	an	individual	can
routinely	oscillate	between	function	pairs,	displaying	no	preference	for	one	over
the	other,	is	dubious.	This	would	be	akin	to	being	ambidextrous	to	the	point	of
having	no	preference	for	writing	with	the	left	or	right	hand.	While	this	could
feasibly	be	the	case	for	a	few	rare	individuals,	it	is	certainly	not	the	norm.
3.	Introversion	(I)	vs.	Extraversion	(E)
Broadly	speaking,	the	notions	of	introversion	and	extraversion	highlight	the
distinction	between	self	(I)	and	world	(E),	individual	(I)	and	collective	(E).	The
ramifications	of	this	E-I	divide	can	be	readily	observed	in	everyday	life,
especially	in	politics.	We	often	hear,	for	instance,	of	people	rallying	for
individual	rights,	individual	liberties,	personal	privacy,	and	so	on.	Words	like
“personal,”	“private,”	and	“individual”	key	us	into	the	fact	that	an	introverted
perspective	is	probably	being	discussed	or	defended.	On	the	other	side	of	the
spectrum,	we	see	people	advocating	for	public	or	collective	laws,	systems,	and
values.	These	represent	a	more	extraverted	approach.	In	politics,	as	well	as	in
everyday	human	affairs,	we	see	a	constant	tension	and	see-sawing	between	the
desires	of	the	individual	and	those	of	the	collective,	between	introverted	and
extraverted	perspectives.
The	E-I	dimension	also	highlights	a	fundamental	distinction	between	inner
experience	(I)	and	outer	experience	(E),	subjective	(I)	and	objective	(E).	Such
differences	might	become	apparent,	for	instance,	when	discussing	your
personality	traits	with	a	friend.	Since	you	alone	are	privy	to	your	first-person
world	of	inner	experience,	you	may	see	and	describe	your	personality	quite
differently	than	your	friend	might.	This	would	seem	particularly	likely	if	you	are
an	introvert,	since	introverts	often	feel	that	others	fail	to	know	or	understand
them	for	who	they	really	are	(i.e.,	for	their	inner	selves).
Over	the	last	few	decades	or	so,	conceptions	of	introverts	and	extraverts	have
found	their	way	out	of	esoteric	obscurity	and	into	everyday	discourse.	In	the
public	mind,	introverts	are	often	conceived	as	shy,	timid,	reserved,	and	perhaps	a
bit	geeky	or	socially	awkward.	Television	shows	like	The	Big	Bang	Theory
hyperbolize	notions	of	the	nerdy,	awkward	introvert.
Extraverts,	in	contrast,	are	commonly	conceived	as	more	outgoing,	aggressive,
popular,	and	physically	impressive.	In	pop	culture,	athletes	and	cheerleaders	are
often	portrayed	as	extraverts,	while	the	geeks	and	artsy	kids	are	depicted	as	more
introverted.
While	certainly	exaggerated	for	their	entertainment	value,	there	is	at	least	a
kernel	of	truth	in	these	depictions;	they	are	not	mere	fantasy.	People	watchers
can	surely	attest	to	the	existence	of	E-I	differences,	even	if	typically	revealed	in
less	dramatic	ways.
Despite	growing	public	awareness	of	E-I	distinctions,	many	people	struggle
when	it	comes	to	identifying	their	own	preference.	They	may	fail	to	resonate
with	images	of	the	awkward	introvert	or	those	of	the	gregarious	extravert.	For
such	persons	(and	you	may	be	one	of	them),	a	more	careful	and	detailed	analysis
is	required.
Jung’s	Theory	of	Introversion	&	Extraversion
Jung	had	much	to	say	about	E-I	differences.	Indeed,	before	he	developed	his
theory	of	the	functions,	he	saw	only	two	primary	personality	types—introverts
and	extraverts.	In	Psychological	Types,	he	extensively	explores	E-I	differences
as	manifest	in	art,	poetry,	and	philosophy.	While	I	certainly	recommend	the
entirety	of	Jung’s	work	to	interested	readers,	what	is	most	important	for	our
present	purpose	is	Jung’s	foundational	premise	that	E	and	I	represent	opposite
directions	of	attention	and	energy	flow.
More	specifically,	Jung	conceived	introverts’	energy	and	attention	as	inwardly
directed—aimed	at	the	self	and	its	interests.	Related	to	this	inner	focus,	Jung
associated	introversion	with	depth	and	intensity.	This	can	be	seen,	for	instance,
in	the	introvert’s	tendency	to	invest	a	great	deal	of	time	and	energy	into	a	single
project,	problem,	person,	or	interest	area.
Conversely,	Jung	saw	extraverts’	focus	as	outwardly	directed,	leading	them	to
act	more	extensively.	We	see	this	in	their	tendency	to	distribute	their	time	and
energies	across	a	broader	range	of	people,	interests,	or	activities.
Independent	(I)	vs.	Collective-Minded	(E)
Especially	in	the	first	half	of	life,	introverts	are	most	interested	in	discovering
exactly	what	it	is	they	have	to	offer	the	world.	They	see	self-knowledge	as	a
prerequisite	to	authentic	action.	Without	an	adequate	map	of	themselves,	they
feel	lost	and	aimless.	For	introverts,	external	circumstances	are	far	less	important
than	self-understanding	and	self-direction.	Once	they	have	a	sense	of	who	they
are	and	what	they	should	be	doing,	they	feel	they	can	be	happy	anywhere.
Extraverts,	by	contrast,	are	most	interested	in	discovering	what	the	world	has	to
offer	them.	Instead	of	turning	inward	for	direction,	they	look	without.	Instead	of
increasing	their	self-knowledge,	they	augment	their	“world-knowledge.”	While
the	self	is	the	introvert’s	forum	for	exploration	and	direction,	the	world	is	center
stage	for	extraverts.
In	looking	inward	first,	introverts	can	be	viewed	as	more	independent-minded
than	extraverts.	In	many	respects,	introverts	trust	themselves	more	than	they	trust
the	world.	More	specifically,	ITPs	place	great	trust	in	their	own	logic,	strategies,
and	methods	(Ti),	IFPs	in	their	personal	tastes,	feelings,	and	moral	sentiments
(Fi),	ISJs	in	their	personal	routines	and	cherished	traditions	(Si),	and	INJs	in
their	impressions	and	insights	(Ni).	Of	all	the	introverted	types,	ISJs	are
probably	the	least	independent-minded	due	to	their	reliance	on	historical	or
cultural	traditions	and	authorities.
In	being	more	outwardly	oriented,	the	extraverted	mind	is	more	influenced	by
and	dependent	on	the	world.	In	some	respect,	extraverts	trust	others,	or	more
broadly,	“the	world,”	more	than	they	trust	themselves.	More	specifically,	ESPs
trust	appearances	(Se),	EFJs	relationships	and	reputations	(Fe),	ENPs	circulating
theories	and	ideas	(Ne),	and	ETJs	collective	standards	and	methods	(Te).	Of	all
the	extraverted	types,	ENPs	are	probably	the	most	independent-minded	since,	as
dominant	intuitives,	they	are	more	heavily	influenced	by	their	own	subconscious
mind.
In	light	of	their	independent-mindedness,	introverts	are	more	concerned	with	the
notion	of	authenticity.	For	them,	this	means	identifying	and	holding	firm	to	their
own	preferences	and	convictions,	even	when	others	are	doing	things	differently.
They	are	wary	of	“selling	out”	or	“selling	their	soul”	for	the	sake	of	conformity
or	convention.
Extraverts,	on	the	other	hand,	are	more	concerned	with	fitting	in	or	keeping	pace
with	what	others	are	doing.	For	them,	authenticity	involves	synchronizing	with
the	outside	world.	If	they	can	attune	to	and	engage	with	what	is	happening	“out
there,”	they	feel	authentically	satisfied.	In	many	respects,	extraverts	are	happiest
when	they	“lose	themselves”	in	external	affairs.	Especially	early	in	life,	they	are
generally	content	to	let	the	world	define	or	direct	them	(again,	ENPs	may	be
somewhat	of	an	exception).	Rather	than	searching	inwardly	for	self-definition,
they	root	their	identity	and	decisions	in	external	affairs,	ideas,	and	affiliations.
Reflection	(I)	vs.	Action	(E)
Introverts	in	general,	and	IJs	in	particular,	tend	to	reflect	before	they	act.	They
approach	life	carefully	and	cautiously	in	order	to	avoid	making	mistakes.	They
take	a	“measure	twice,	cut	once	approach.”	This	is	true	with	respect	to	spending
money,	having	children,	assuming	external	commitments,	and	so	on.	Although
IPs	are	certainly	reflective,	their	P	preference	contributes	an	impulsive	element
that	may	at	times	diminish	or	override	their	introverted	reflectiveness.
Extraverts	in	general,	and	EPs	in	particular,	are	less	concerned	about	committing
errors.	Their	strategy	is	one	of	quantity	over	quality.	So	rather	than	taking	time
to	prepare	and	focus	on	hitting	the	target,	they	simply	increase	their	number	of
attempts.	Whether	spending	money,	promoting	a	new	idea,	pursuing	a	new	love
interest,	or	having	children,	extraverts	are	generally	less	cautious	and
conservative	by	nature.	They	are	more	willing	to	take	risks	and	“put	themselves
out	there,”	taking	an	“act	now,	think	later”	sort	of	approach.	While	EJs	are
typically	quicker	to	act	than	introverts,	their	J	preference	contributes	a	penchant
for	planning	that	may	in	some	ways	counteract	their	extraverted	quickness.
Strangers	(I)	vs.	Citizens	(E)	of	the	World
Introverts	typically	prefer	a	quieter,	slower-paced	lifestyle.	They	don’t
particularly	enjoy	or	feel	comfortable	with	the	extraverted	rat	race.	There	are	two
interrelated	reasons	for	this.	First,	as	we	will	soon	discuss	in	greater	detail,
introverts	are	more	easily	overwhelmed	by	external	stimuli.	They	tend	to	be
more	sensitive	than	extraverts,	which	can	dispose	them	to	feeling	anxious	or
overtaxed	when	too	much	is	happening	around	them.	Second,	introverts	prefer	a
slower	and	quieter	life	because	it	affords	them	time	and	space	to	nourish	and
replenish	themselves.	Down	time	is	like	air	for	introverts.	They	need	ample	time
to	catch	their	breath,	reflect	on	life,	and	explore	their	own	interests.
Extraverts,	by	contrast,	are	more	at	home	in,	and	energized	by	the	world.	Being
alone	for	too	long	can	be	unsettling	for	extraverts,	engendering	feelings	of
boredom,	restlessness,	loneliness,	low	self-esteem,	etc.	Extraverts	actually	feel
safer	and	more	comfortable	when	their	attention	and	energies	are	directed
outwardly.	This	helps	them	forget	themselves	and	act	without	self-
consciousness.	Introverts,	of	course,	are	the	opposite.	They	feel	most	themselves
when	“doing	their	own	thing”	and	more	self-conscious	when	around	others.
Sensitive	(I)	vs.	Uninhibited	(E)
Why	are	introverts	more	careful,	cautious,	and	self-contained	than	extraverts?
Why	are	they	more	easily	overwhelmed	by	external	demands	or	stimuli?	
For	answers	to	these	questions,	we	will	now	take	a	brief	detour	to	explore
Jerome	Kagan’s	research	on	temperament,	as	well	as	Elaine	Aron’s	work	on
highly	sensitive	persons	.
Kagan	is	widely	recognized	for	his	work	on	the	physiological	basis	of
temperament.	In	his	book,	Galen’s	Prophecy,	he	details	a	number	of	studies
designed	to	examine	temperamental	differences	among	infants	and	children.
Kagan	found	that	some	infants	were	more	sensitive,	anxious,	and	vigorous	in
their	responses	to	external	stimuli;	he	referred	to	these	as	high	reactives.	Infants
who	were	characteristically	calmer	and	less	fearful	were	classified	as	low
reactives.	Kagan	also	studied	the	characteristics	of	children	and	again	identified
two	distinct	groups:	inhibited	children	and	uninhibited	children.	Inhibited
children,	according	to	Kagan,	displayed	the	following	characteristics:
Reluctance	to	spontaneously	engage	with	unfamiliar	children
Absence	of	spontaneous	smiles	with	unfamiliar	people
Required	more	time	to	relax	in	new	situations
Reluctance	to	take	risks;	cautious	behavior
Unusual	fears	and	phobias
Heightened	muscle	tension
In	considering	these	findings,	you	may	have	noticed	some	striking	similarities
among	high-reactive	infants,	inhibited	children,	and	what	we	consider
introverted	characteristics.	Kagan	noted	these	associations	as	well,	so	he	decided
to	follow	his	subjects	over	time	to	see	how	inborn	temperament	might	translate
into	personality.	In	general,	he	found	that	high-reactive	infants	and	inhibited
children	continued	to	display	introverted	characteristics,	whereas	low	reactives
and	uninhibited	children	proceeded	along	a	more	extraverted	path.
Kagan’s	research	dovetails	nicely	with	that	of	another	important	theorist,	Elaine
Aron.	Aron	is	well-known,	especially	among	introverts,	for	her	work	on	“highly
sensitive	persons”	(HSPs).	According	to	Aron,	sensitive	individuals	are	“easily
overwhelmed	by	highly	stimulating	or	unfamiliar	situations.”	Consistent	with
Kagan's	research,	she	reports	that	approximately	70%	of	sensitive	persons	are
introverted.
The	work	of	Kagan	and	Aron	provides	a	helpful	starting	point	for	decoding	the
psychophysiological	differences	between	introverts	and	extraverts.	Even	at	birth,
fledgling	introverts	tend	to	be	more	fearful,	reactive,	and	guarded.	They	seem	to
experience	the	world	as	a	precarious	place,	one	that	requires	vigilance	to	ensure
their	safety	and	survival.	Being	more	sensitive	and	prone	to	hyperarousal,	they
naturally	seek	time	alone,	finding	safety	and	comfort	in	their	own	corner	of	the
world.	Even	as	adults,	introverts	take	measures	to	protect	themselves	against
unwanted	intrusions,	maintaining	a	line	of	separation	between	themselves	and
the	world.
Like	Kagan’s	low-reactive	infants	and	uninhibited	children,	extraverts	tend	to	be
less	sensitive	and	less	intimidated	by	external	stimuli.	This	grants	them	more
confidence	to	boldly	move	outward	and	explore	the	world	directly,	spawning
their	development	as	“citizens	of	the	world.”
A	Mixed	Bag
As	discussed	at	the	outset	of	this	book,	we	all	have	a	fixed	and	stable	personality
type.	We	are	either	introverts	or	extraverts.	At	our	core,	none	of	us	are
ambiverts.	This	does	not	mean,	however,	that	we	all	present	as	extreme
introverts	or	extraverts.	Indeed,	many	of	us	look	more	like	a	mixed	bag	of	E	and
I.
In	thinking	about	the	E-I	preference,	it	is	helpful	to	keep	in	mind	that	all
extraverts	have	introverted	auxiliary	and	inferior	functions,	which	means	they
will	display	some	degree	of	inner	concern	and	focus.	Similarly,	introverts’	use	of
extraverted	auxiliary	and	inferior	functions	may	compel	them	to	(eventually)
make	their	mark	on	the	world	at	large.
The	drive	for	personal	growth	can	also	lead	to	a	mixing	of	E	and	I	tendencies.
Namely,	for	introverts,	personal	growth	involves	“taking	the	inside	(I)	out	(E),”
which	may	inspire	them	to	direct	more	of	their	attention	and	energy	outwardly.
For	extraverts,	personal	growth	entails	“bringing	the	outside	(E)	in	(I),”	which
may	contribute	to	an	increasingly	inward	focus.
Since	so	many	things	in	life	demand	a	measure	of	extraversion,	introverts	seem
particularly	obligated	and	likely	to	develop	their	extraverted	capacities.	It	is
difficult,	after	all,	to	survive	school,	family,	work,	or	peer	interactions	without
some	degree	of	extraverted	development.	While	not	necessarily	a	bad	thing,	this
may	at	times	make	it	more	difficult	for	introverts	to	recognize	their	E-I
preference.
Other	personality	preferences	and	functions	can	also	cloud	our	E-I	preference.
Consider,	for	instance,	the	issue	of	talkativeness.	While	most	folks	assume
extraverts	to	be	more	talkative	than	introverts,	there	are	other	preferences,	as
well	as	functions,	that	factor	into	talkativeness.	Generally	speaking,	the	E,	N,
and	J	preferences	can	be	associated	with	higher	levels	of	talkativeness,	as	can	the
function,	Extraverted	Feeling	(Fe).	It	would	therefore	not	be	unusual,	for
instance,	to	find	an	INFJ	more	loquacious	than	an	ESTP.
We	can	see	from	this	example	how	tricky	typing	can	be.	If	we	were	to	use
talkativeness	as	our	sole	E-I	criterion,	then	INFJs	and	ESTPs,	as	well	as	other
types,	might	regularly	misidentify	their	true	preference.	This	reminds	us	of	the
importance	of	considering	the	bigger	picture,	of	taking	a	bird’seye	view,	as	you
go	about	discerning	your	personality	preferences.
Summary
Common	Introverted	Traits:
Inner/self-focus
More	independent-minded
More	cautious,	conservative,	and	discriminating;	“look	before	they	leap”;
rely	heavily	on	forethought	(especially	IJs)
Prefer	a	slower,	quieter,	reflective	life
More	easily	overwhelmed	by	external	stimuli
Feel	somewhat	alien,	uncomfortable,	or	inadequate	in	the	world
Often	less	talkative	(especially	ISPs)
More	self-reflective	and	self-aware
Require	more	time	to	themselves
Common	Extraverted	Traits:
Outer/world-focus
More	collective-minded
“Act	now,	think	later”	(especially	EPs);	more	assertive	and	risk-tolerant
Enjoy	a	busier,	“on	the	go”	lifestyle
Less	concerned	with	being	harmed	or	overwhelmed	by	world
Feel	rather	at	home	in	the	world
Often	more	talkative	(especially	ENJs)
More	world-reflective	and	world-aware
Require	less	time	to	themselves
Common	E-I	Mistypings
Having	now	developed	a	working	understanding	of	introversion	and
extraversion,	I’d	like	to	take	a	moment	to	consider	some	common	E-I
mistypings;	that	is,	when	introverts	misclassify	themselves	as	extraverts	or	vice-
versa.
As	is	true	of	the	other	preferences,	one	of	the	most	common	reasons	for	E-I
mistypings	is	the	inferior	function.	Because	introverts’	inferior	function	is
extraverted	in	nature,	they	have	a	desire	to	“turn	their	insides	out.”	Not	only	may
this	compel	them	to	strive	after	fame,	influence,	or	status,	but	it	may	also	lead
them	to	mistype	as	extraverts.	Similarly,	extraverts,	in	striving	to	“turn	their
outsides	in,”	to	know	or	better	themselves,	may	mistype	as	introverts.
E-I	mistypings	can	also	stem	from	J-P	issues.	Namely,	because	perceivers	are
more	impulsive	and	less	careful	than	judgers,	IPs	may	mistake	themselves	for
extraverts.	Similarly,	since	judging	types	tend	to	be	more	careful,	cautious,	and
deliberative,	EJs	may	mistype	as	introverts.
Another	common	mistyping	involves	ENPs	misclassifying	as	INPs.	Since	ENPs
are	strong	intuitives,	they	may	confuse	being	intuitive	with	being	introverted,
since	both	I	and	N	can	be	associated	with	reflectiveness.	ENPs	may	also	be	less
physically	active	than	other	extraverts,	since	it	is	really	their	mind	that	is	most
actively	engaging	with	the	world.	So	while	their	attention	is	still	outwardly
directed,	the	predominantly	mental	nature	of	their	extraversion	may	serve	as	a
point	of	confusion.
Our	final	E-I	mistyping	involves	ISPs,	who	may	misclassify	as	extraverts
because	of	their	tendency	to	function	as	“busy	bodies.”	They	may	mistakenly
assume	that,	because	extraverts	lead	an	active	lifestyle,	their	penchant	for	being
busy	and	active	suggests	they	are	extraverts.	This	mistyping	represents	the	flip
side	of	what	we	saw	with	ENPs,	who	are	prone	to	conflating	higher	levels	of
mental	activity	with	introversion.
This	concludes	our	analysis	of	the	E-I	preference.	For	those	seeking	a	more
extensive	look	at	introverts	and	extraverts,	I	recommend	Susan	Cain’s	excellent
book,	Quiet:	The	Power	of	Introverts	in	a	World	that	Can’t	Stop	Talking.
4.	Sensing	(S)	vs.	Intuition	(N)
In	its	broadest	sense,	the	S-N	dimension	can	be	seen	as	corresponding	to
philosophical	notions	of	material	(S)	and	immaterial	(N),	seen	(S)	and	unseen
(N),	empirical	(S)	and	theoretical	(N),	matter	(S)	and	mind	(N),	physics	(S)	and
metaphysics	(N).
According	to	Jung,	sensing	and	intuition	are	perceiving	functions,	responsible
for	receiving	or	retrieving	information.	Watching	television,	smelling	flowers,
reading	novels,	and	recalling	something	from	memory	are	examples	of
perceiving	activities.	Unlike	the	judging	functions,	which	often	involve	a	sense
of	volition	and	intentionality,	the	perceiving	functions	typically	feel	more
passive	in	nature,	as	the	vast	majority	of	our	perceptions	are	handled
automatically	and	subconsciously.
Of	the	two	modes	of	perceiving,	sensing	is	easier	for	most	people	to
comprehend.	After	all,	most	of	us	are	familiar	with	the	“five	senses”—sight,
smell,	taste,	hearing,	and	touch.	The	notion	of	intuition,	however,	seems	more
vague	and	esoteric.	We	must	therefore	take	a	closer	look	at	intuition,	as	well	as
how	it	compares	and	contrasts	with	sensing.
What	Exactly	is	Intuition?
While	our	senses	tell	us	about	the	surface	appearance	of	things,	intuition	dives
deeper,	discerning	hidden	patterns,	connections,	and	motivations.	It	surveys
available	information,	both	conscious	and	unconscious,	and	works	to	get	a	sense
of	what	things	mean	or	look	like	when	taken	as	a	whole.	It	excels	at	making
inferences,	filling	in	any	holes	or	gaps	to	develop	theories	and	explanations.
When	dominant	intuitives	(i.e.,	INJs	and	ENPs)	express	the	need	to	"think
about"	something,	this	means	something	quite	different	from	what	it	might	for
other	types.	Namely,	the	lion's	share	of	their	thinking	occurs	subconsciously,
outside	the	bounds	of	conscious	control	and	awareness.	Consequently,	their	ideas
and	insights	often	arrive	unexpectedly,	as	if	coming	from	“out	of	the	blue.”	In
his	bestselling	book,	Blink,	Malcolm	Gladwell	cleverly	describes	intuition	as
“thinking	without	thinking.”	For	intuitives,	"sleeping	on	a	problem”	is	as	sure	a
route	to	a	solution	as	any.
Because	the	products	of	intuition	are	commonly	experienced	as	unexpected	gifts,
its	workings	are	sometimes	perceived	as	magical	or	mystical.	But	thanks	to	Jung
and	company,	we	can	now	identify	the	magician	as	the	subconscious	mind.
Enjoying	ready	access	to	the	ideational	magician	that	is	the	subconscious,
intuitives	have	a	knack	for	generating	and	working	with	ideas,	associations,
theories,	symbols,	and	other	abstractions.
Although	intuitives	are	privy	to	subconscious	ideas	and	images,	there	is	still	a
sense	in	which	they	cannot	control	the	creative	process.	What	they	can	control,
at	least	to	some	extent,	is	what	they	do	with	their	conscious	mind.	Namely,	they
can	control	the	types	of	information	they	ingest,	as	well	as	the	sorts	of	questions
or	problems	they	consciously	(and	therefore	also	subconsciously)	wrestle	with.
The	more	they	immerse	themselves	in	a	certain	topic	or	interest	area,	the	more
their	subconscious	will	eventually	yield.
As	strange	as	it	might	seem	from	a	sensor’s	perspective,	the	concrete	world	is
not	what	is	most	“real”	for	intuitives	(especially	for	ENPs	and	INJs).	It	is	not	the
physical	realm,	but	the	metaphysical	realm,	that	constitutes	their	primary	reality.
Indeed,	many	intuitives	have	a	weak	sense	of	connection	to	the	physical	world,
even	to	their	own	bodies.	Some	report	feelings	of	disembodiment	or	a	lingering
sense	of	déjà	vu.	Because	of	their	close	kinship	with	the	subconscious,	their
routine	existence	can	assume	a	dreamlike	or	abstracted	quality,	blurring	the
distinction	between	dreams	and	reality.	This	is	why	intuitives	are	often	well-
described	as	dreamy,	absent-minded,	oblivious,	or	otherworldly.
“All	on	the	Table”
To	further	illustrate	S-N	differences,	let’s	briefly	turn	our	attention	to	the
exciting	world	of	tables.	Yes,	I	did	say	tables,	you	know	those	things	with	flat
tops	and	four	legs.
We	all	know	that	a	table	has	specific	parts	and	features—its	size,	shape,
contours,	texture,	color,	and	constitutive	materials.	Such	are	its	sensing-related
elements.
But	there	is	a	more	to	a	table	than	what	meets	the	eye	(or	the	hands).	A	table	is
also	an	idea,	a	concept,	a	mental	image.	This	aspect	of	the	table	is	handled	by
intuition.
We	also	know	that	there	are	different	types	of	tables.	Indeed,	there	is	an	infinite
number	of	potential	tables.	But	at	the	end	of	the	day,	they	are	all	still	tables.	This
shows	us	that	we	have	a	foundational	idea	of	what	a	table	is	(Ni),	as	well	as	the
capacity	to	envision	different	types	of	tables	(Ne).
In	light	of	the	above,	tables	can	teach	us	about	the	differences	between	sensing
and	intuition,	as	well	as	how	they	work	together	in	a	complementary	fashion.
Clearly,	both	S	and	N	are	essential	to	our	ability	to	create	and	recognize	tables.
Without	the	idea	(N)	of	a	table,	we	would	have	no	point	of	reference	for
identifying	or	constructing	a	table.	Likewise,	without	the	materials	and	physical
labor	(S),	the	table	would	remain	but	an	unrealized	idea.
Potential	(N)	vs.	Actual	(S)
Just	as	intuition	gives	us	ideas	about	things	like	tables,	intuitives	are	“idea
people.”	They	work	on	the	front	end,	so	to	speak,	of	the	creative	process.	They,
or	perhaps	more	accurately,	their	subconscious	minds,	create	or	bring	forth
potentials	in	the	form	of	ideas	or	images	(e.g.,	envisioning	a	new	type	of	table).
Sensing	types,	by	contrast,	are	wired	to	work	on	the	back	end	of	the	creative
process.	It	is	their	role	to	enact	and	actualize,	to	give	physical	form	to,	ideas	and
potentials.	They	are	the	hands,	feet,	and	senses	of	the	creative	process.
Since	intuitives	are	inclined	to	work	with	ideas,	theories,	and	mental	imagery,
they	spend	ample	time	contemplating	life	in	abstract	ways.	They	enjoy	peering
beneath	the	surface	to	see	how	things	(or	people)	work,	as	well	as	how	they	are
connected	and	interrelated.	They	enjoy	lengthy	discussions	of	abstract	matters
like	theology,	philosophy,	political	theory,	science,	and	so	on.	They	tend	to	feel
more	comfortable	observing	and	appraising	life	from	afar	than	diving	in	and
getting	their	hands	dirty.	For	intuitives,	spending	time	in	thought	and	the
imagination	comes	more	naturally	than	doing,	acting,	or	implementing.
Dominant	intuitives	(ENPs	and	INJs),	in	particular,	may	lack	confidence	in	their
ability	to	materialize	their	ideas	or	to	handle	S	details.	They	may	worry	that	their
actions	or	creations	will	fail	to	measure	up	to	their	imagined	ideals,	that	actuality
will	fall	short	of	potentiality.
Sensing	types,	by	contrast,	may	furtively	fret	about	their	ability	to	produce	good
ideas	or	theories.	For	instance,	an	ESFP	friend	of	mine	recently	apprised	me	of
her	concerns	about	finishing	a	10-page	paper	in	a	month’s	time.	Since	N	is	her
inferior	and	therefore	least	accessible	function,	it	is	not	surprising	that	she	lacks
confidence	in	generating	and	stringing	together	ideas.	While	intuitive	types	often
enjoy	abstract	challenges	such	as	writing	term	papers,	sensing	types	like	my
friend	are	more	apt	to	enjoy	concrete	activities,	such	as	laboratory	sessions	or
field	experiences.
Another	great	example	of	S-N	differences	can	be	gleaned	from	the	world	of
music.	While	some	musicians	may	excel	in	both	music	composition	and
performance,	this	is	the	exception	rather	than	the	rule.	Indeed,	this	is	why	music
education	programs	are	commonly	divided	into	two	separate	tracks:	a	theory	/
composition	(N)	track	and	a	performance	(S)	track.	N	musicians	typically	excel
and	take	interest	in	the	front	end	of	a	musical	production,	composing	nuanced,
intricate,	and	thoughtful	songs.	The	strength	of	S	musicians,	by	contrast,	is
usually	on	the	back	end.	Whether	singing,	dancing,	or	playing	instruments,	they
are	naturals	when	it	comes	to	execution	and	performance	(especially	SPs).
Connections	(N)	vs.	Particulars	(S)
Intuition	is	a	synthesizing	and	associating	function.	It	is	concerned	with	how
things	connect	and	relate	to	each	other.	It	is	particularly	interested	in
relationships	among	ideas,	in	seeing	connections	between	one	abstraction	and
another.	Intuitives	are	more	interested	in	the	connections	between	things	than
they	are	in	the	things	themselves.	This	includes	identifying	patterns	of	causal
relations	and	developing	explanatory	theories.
Sensing	types,	by	contrast,	tend	to	focus	more	on	details	and	particulars	than	on
the	way	things	connect	up.	In	having	a	less	intimate	connection	with	the
ideational	subconscious,	they	are	less	attuned	to	hidden	patterns	and	underlying
relationships.	While	certainly	aware	of	overt	physical	laws,	they	are	less	inclined
to	spend	time	reflecting	on	deeper	causes	and	abstract	theories.	This	is	especially
true	for	S	dominants	(ISJs	and	ESPs),	for	whom	N	is	inferior.
In	like	fashion,	intuitives,	especially	ENPs	and	INJs,	may	struggle	when	it
comes	to	handling	S	details.	Since	their	minds	are	often	engrossed	in
abstractions,	they	may	fail	to	see	things	that	are	right	under	their	noses.	They
may	lose	track	of	time,	forget	to	pay	the	bills,	misplace	their	keys,	skip	over
buttons	and	belt	loops,	fail	to	balance	the	checkbook,	etc.	In	light	of	their
shortcomings	with	respect	to	everyday	details,	they	are	often	well	described	as
oblivious	or	absent-minded.
Summary
Characteristics	of	Sensors:
Caught	up	in	living	life,	they	may	forget	to	reflect	on	it	(especially	ESPs)
Generally	prefer	and	are	at	their	best	with	practical,	concrete	activities
Excel	in	handling	details	and	daily	affairs
Lovers	of	new	sights,	tastes,	and	sensations	(SPs)	or	routines	and	traditions
(SJs)
More	concerned	with	the	facts,	details,	or	particulars	than	the	connections
between	them
Most	effective	on	the	back	end	of	the	creative	process,	with	enacting	and
implementing
Characteristics	of	Intuitives:
Often	lost	in	thought,	their	minds	are	“somewhere	else”
May	struggle	to	attend	to	the	concrete	details	of	daily	life	(especially	INJs
and	ENPs)
Prefer	to	deal	in	theoretical,	imaginative,	or	speculative	realms;	love
working	with	ideas
Enjoy	contemplating	abstract	patterns,	connections,	and	languages,	be	they
verbal,	mathematical,	or	computer-based
More	interested	in	the	connections	between	things	(especially	abstract
things)	than	in	the	things	themselves
Most	effective	on	the	front	end	of	the	creative	process,	with	generating
ideas	or	insights
Common	S-N	Mistypings
As	we	saw	with	the	E-I	dimension,	there	are	certain	situations	in	which	sensors
commonly	mistype	as	intuitives,	and	vice-versa.	On	the	whole,	however,	it
seems	more	common	for	sensors	to	mistype	as	intuitives	than	the	other	way
around.
One	common	mistyping	involves	IS	types	misidentifying	as	intuitives.	This
relates	to	the	fact	that	both	introversion	and	intuition	contribute	an	element	of
reflectiveness.	ISPs	may	be	particularly	prone	to	S-N	errors,	since	neither
sensing	nor	intuition	serves	as	their	dominant	function.
As	with	the	other	personality	preferences,	the	inferior	function	is	another
common	culprit	in	S-N	mistypings.	Specifically,	ESPs	striving	after	the	wisdom
and	insight	promised	by	their	inferior	Ni	may	be	prone	to	mistype	as	intuitives.
Similarly,	ISJs	desirous	of	Ne	cleverness	and	creativity	may	misidentify	as	INJs.
While	ENPs	and	INJs	seem	less	likely	to	mistype	as	sensors,	for	those	who	do,
the	inferior	function	is	often	at	play.
Last,	associating	intuition	with	open-mindedness	or	certain	types	of	intelligence
may	inspire	sensors	to	mistype	as	intuitives.	This	seems	especially	likely	for
sensors	with	higher	IQs.
5.	Thinking	(T)	vs.	Feeling	(F)
On	a	broad	level,	thinking	and	feeling	point	to	what	are	commonly	conceived	as
masculine	(T)	-	feminine	(F)	differences.	While	not	synonymous	with	sex
differences,	demographic	data	support	the	common	observation	that	the	majority
of	males	prefer	thinking	and	females	feeling.
Because	of	its	association	with	masculinity	and	femininity,	the	T-F	dichotomy
seems	to	be	one	of	the	easiest	for	people	to	comprehend.	This	of	course	is	not	to
say	we	all	have	an	easy	time	deciphering	our	T-F	preference,	especially	those
sporting	a	more	androgynous	personality.	EPs	and	IJs	may	find	discerning	their
T-F	preference	particularly	challenging,	since	neither	thinking	nor	feeling	serves
as	their	dominant	function.
Jung	classified	thinking	and	feeling	as	judging	functions.	They	are	in	charge	of
evaluating	information,	making	decisions,	and	drawing	conclusions.
The	primary	difference	between	thinking	judgments	and	feeling	judgments	is	the
nature	of	their	evaluative	criteria.	As	we	will	see,	thinkers	tend	to	use
impersonal,	logic-based	criteria,	while	feelers	consider	tastes	and	feelings—both
their	own	and	those	of	others—in	making	decisions.
Thinkers	and	feelers	also	differ	in	their	areas	of	interest	and	expertise.	Typically,
these	are	directly	related	to	their	preferred	judging	criteria.	Namely,	thinkers	tend
to	take	interest	in	activities	requiring	the	application	of	impersonal	logic,	while
feelers	take	up	pursuits	that	draw	on	their	tastes,	feelings,	and	people-related
concerns.
As	with	the	other	preferences,	it’s	not	that	thinkers	never	have	feelings	or	that
feelers	never	use	logic.	Rather,	they	differ	in	the	degree	to	which	they	lead	with
logic	versus	tastes	and	feelings;	this	is	why	we	describe	T	and	F	as	preferences.
Overview	of	Thinking
Thinking	judgments	are	logic-based.	This	is	why	thinkers	tend	to	excel	and	take
interest	in	fields	requiring	logical	or	strategical	thinking	such	as	the	sciences,
mathematics,	philosophy,	computer	science,	business,	or	engineering.	Even	those
involved	in	F-related	fields,	such	as	healthcare,	tend	to	work	their	way	into	T
niches,	such	as	research,	informatics,	operations	management,	and	the	like.
Thinking	has	a	quantitative	bent	to	it;	it	is	a	“calculating”	function.	Even	if
subconsciously,	it	is	constantly	weighing	odds	and	scheming	ways	of	moving
things	in	a	better	direction.	Such	calculations	play	an	important	role	in
strategical	and	logistical	thinking,	computing	ways	of	reducing	costs	or
improving	efficiency	and	productivity.
Systematizing	and	classifying	also	factor	into	the	thinker’s	arsenal,	especially
that	of	NTs.	Scientists	and	philosophers	alike	display	a	penchant	for	ordering	and
systematizing	information.	NTJs,	in	particular,	are	commonly	described	as
“systems	thinkers.”	This	involves	seeing	the	world	as	a	giant	system	composed
of	myriad	subsystems,	each	of	which	can	be	analyzed	and	rationally	explicated.
Thinkers	also	tend	to	experience	diminished	emotional	responses,	at	least
compared	to	those	of	their	feeling	counterparts.	They	generally	show	less
interest	in	and	concern	for	their	own	feelings,	as	well	as	those	of	others.	After
all,	the	reason	thinking	and	feeling	have	long	been	conceived	of	as	opposites	is
because	logic-based	processing	and	emotion-based	processing	cannot	occur
simultaneously.	This	is	not	to	say	that	thinkers	and	feelers	never	arrive	at	similar
conclusions	or	come	to	a	point	of	mutual	understanding;	nor	is	it	to	say	than	an
individual	cannot	alternate	between	these	two	modes	of	processing,	considering
things	from	both	T	and	F	vantage	points.	The	point	is	simply	that	thinking	and
feeling	use	very	different	evaluative	mechanisms	and	criteria,	which	makes	it
difficult	for	them	to	operate	simultaneously,	or	co-operate	if	you	will.
Since	their	feelings	are	typically	confined	to	the	backstage	of	their
consciousness,	thinkers	are	sometimes	conceived	as	emotionally	distant	or
detached.	While	not	always	beneficial	for	their	relationships,	emotional
detachment	can	be	advantageous	for	effective	logical	processing.	This	is	not	to
say	that	thinkers	should	avoid	feeling-related	matters,	but	there	are	times	when
unalloyed	logical	processing	proves	useful.
Because	thinkers	spend	less	time	attuning	to	and	meeting	the	needs	of	others,
they	have	more	time	and	energy	to	devote	to	their	work.	Indeed,	for	many
thinkers,	their	work	is	the	central	focus	of	their	lives.	Just	as	feelers	often	aspire
to	help	others	or	strengthen	their	relationships,	thinkers	strive	to	advance	in	their
work.	To	be	clear,	it’s	not	that	feelers	don’t	also	aspire	toward	or	achieve
excellence	in	their	interest	areas.	But	in	many	cases,	their	attention	and	energies
are	divided	among	work,	relationships,	and	caregiving.	Thinkers,	especially
thinking-dominant	(ITPs	and	ETJs)	males,	tend	to	be	more	one-track	minded,
granting	their	work	the	lion’s	share	of	their	attention	and	devotion.
Overview	of	Feeling
The	feeling	function	weighs	and	evaluates	our	affective	responses	to	the	world.
Not	only	are	feelers	aware	of	their	emotions,	but	they	are	also	attuned	to
emotional	nuances	and	subtleties	(just	as	thinkers	are	attuned	to	logical
subtleties).	Indeed,	for	every	emotion	in	a	thinker’s	arsenal,	a	feeler	may
distinguish	a	multitude	of	feelings	or	feeling	tones.
Because	feelers	discern	a	greater	breadth	of	emotional	variations	and	nuances,
they	may	feel	that	words	are	inadequate	to	capture	and	convey	their	experiences.
Many	turn	to	poetry,	music,	fashion,	or	the	arts	as	avenues	for	evoking,
exploring,	refining,	or	expressing	their	complex	and	nuanced	emotions.	Feeling
also	pertains	to	the	development	and	refinement	of	tastes,	which	is	another
reason	feelers	are	drawn	to	the	arts.
If	we	associate	thinking	with	black-and-white,	logical	criteria,	then	feeling	can
be	viewed	to	involve	a	more	colorful,	qualitative	approach.	While	thinking
focuses	on	things	like	technology	and	functionality,	feeling	strives	to	enhance
our	lives	in	less	“functional”	or	“practical”	ways.	It	embellishes,	enlivens,	and
enriches	with	color,	feeling,	and	style.
Feelers	also	have	a	propensity	to	function	as	nurturers	and	caregivers.	They	can
often	be	found	caring	for	children,	plants,	animals,	family	members,	employees,
and	the	underserved.	They	serve	as	a	sort	of	social	glue	that	keeps	people
healthy,	connected,	and	attuned	to	each	other’s	needs	and	feelings.	While	female
feelers	tend	to	be	the	most	nurturing	of	all	types,	male	feelers	are	also	quite
nurturing.	Male	nurses,	therapists,	and	flight	attendants,	for	instance,	are
commonly	feeling	types.
It’s	important	to	recognize	that	feeling	should	not	be	equated	with	irrationality.
Indeed,	Jung	went	out	of	his	way	to	ensure	that	thinking	and	feeling	were
approached	on	equal	grounds,	classifying	both	as	“rational”	functions.	Jung	also
took	care	to	distinguish	the	feeling	function	from	emotions,	essentially	saying
that	the	feeling	function	is	charged	with	evaluating	emotions.	From	a	practical
standpoint,	however,	the	fact	remains	that	feelers	must	navigate	a	world	of	ever-
changing	emotions.	And	in	my	view,	feelings	and	emotions	are	entirely
reasonable	and	useful	tools	for	navigating	human	affairs.	Just	as	certain	types	of
logic	or	formulae	are	appropriate	for	solving	logic-based	problems,	emotions	are
appropriate,	even	necessary,	for	addressing	a	spectrum	of	human	problems	and
needs.	The	very	notion	of	emotional	intelligence	speaks	to	the	value	of
experiencing,	understanding,	and	communicating	the	important	truths	and
qualities	conveyed	through	feelings.
Taste	&	Style:	S,	F,	or	Both?
In	light	of	my	assertion	that	feelers	bring	taste,	color,	and	style	to	the	world,	you
may	be	wondering	where	feeling	ends	and	sensing	begins.
On	a	theoretical	level,	it	is	tempting	to	suggest	that	the	feeling	preference	is
unrelated	to	taste,	style,	and	fashion.	From	an	empirical	perspective,	however,
this	seems	unacceptable,	given	that	feeling	types	typically	display	stronger
interests	in	the	arts,	fashion,	scents,	cooking,	and	so	on.	Even	NF	writers	(e.g.,
novelists)	tend	to	include	much	in	the	way	of	sensory	detail	in	their	works.	This
is	suggestive	of	a	connection	between	sensations	and	emotions,	which	leads	me
to	believe	that	taste,	style,	and	fashion	pertain	to	both	the	S	and	F	preferences.
As	a	counterpoint	to	this,	one	could	argue	that	thinkers	have	their	own	sense	of
taste	and	style,	even	if	focused	more	on	things	like	functionality	and	efficiency.
But	even	then,	the	fact	remains	that	thinkers	are	less	interested	in	thinking	about
styles	and	fashions	than	other	matters.	This	reminds	us	of	the	different	evaluative
criteria	employed	by	thinkers	and	feelers.	Namely,	thinkers	don’t	invest	a	lot	of
time	judging	fashions	and	styles	because	these	things	fall	outside	the	purview	of
logic.	Likewise,	feelers	tend	not	to	obsess	over	solving	logical	problems	that	fall
beyond	the	evaluative	scope	of	feeling.
In	positing	some	degree	of	SF	overlap	with	respect	to	the	notions	of	taste	and
style,	I	am	in	no	way	suggesting	this	as	a	barrier	to	effective	typing.	There	are
plenty	of	other	criteria,	discussed	in	this	chapter	and	others,	that	can	be	used	for
the	sake	of	T-F,	as	well	as	S-N,	clarification.
What	about	Values?
It	is	commonplace	in	typological	circles	to	associate	the	feeling	preference	with
a	concern	for	“values.”	In	light	of	the	similarity	of	preferences	and	values	(i.e.,
we	prefer	what	we	value,	and	value	what	we	prefer),	this	can	appear	a	bit
problematic.	After	all,	T	and	F	(as	well	as	S	and	N)	are	preferences,	and	could
even	by	construed	as	values,	at	least	in	a	general	sense.
The	real	difference	between	thinkers	and	feelers	involves	what	they	value.	As
we’ve	seen,	thinkers	value	improving	the	functionality	of	things.	They	value
things	like	efficiency,	utility,	and	good	strategy.	Feelers,	on	the	other	hand,	value
the	way	things	look,	smell,	taste,	and	sound,	all	of	which	impact	their	feelings.
Feelers	also	place	higher	value	on	people	and	relationships,	while	being	more
sensitive	to	perceived	instances	of	injustice,	inequality,	and	other	moral	issues.
When	typologists	associate	values	with	F,	my	sense	is	that	the	term	is	typically
being	used	in	a	moral	or	people-related	sense	(e.g.,	family	or	humanitarian
values).	This	is	generally	an	accurate	attribution,	since	thinkers	tend	to	be	more
concerned	about	themselves	or	their	work	than	the	well-being	of	others.	With
that	said,	using	the	term	"values"	without	further	qualification	may	at	times	be
misleading,	since	thinkers	value	T	matters	to	the	same	degree	that	feelers	value	F
matters.
T-F	&	Gender
To	some	extent,	I	feel	sorry	for	male	feelers	and	female	thinkers	trying	to
understanding	themselves	through	the	lens	of	typology.	After	all,	the	vast
majority	of	type	profiles	are	written	with	a	particular	sex	in	mind.	Thinking
profiles	are	often	written	with	men	in	mind	and	feeling	profiles	with	women	in
mind.	This	can	make	it	challenging	for	T	females	and	F	males	to	feel	confident
about	their	personality	type.
Part	of	the	problem	is	that,	even	when	type	is	accounted	for,	gender	still
contributes	to	personality	differences.	A	2001	paper	entitled,	“Gender
Differences	in	Personality	Traits	Across	Cultures,”	found	consistent	gender
differences	across	26	cultures	(Costa,	et	al.).	Most	notable	for	our	purposes,	this
study	showed	that	women	are	generally	more	nurturing	than	men.	Even	the
issuers	of	the	MBTI	are	aware	of	the	impact	of	gender,	evidenced	by	the	fact	that
the	MBTI	factors	gender	into	its	T-F	tabulations.
A	more	recent	study	(2013),	“Sex	Differences	in	the	Structural	Connectome	of
the	Human	Brain,”	revealed	that	female	brains	display	greater	neuronal
connectivity	between	hemispheres,	whereas	male	brains	show	increased
connectivity	within	each	hemisphere.	In	interpreting	these	findings,	the
researchers	suggested	that	females	are	more	likely	to	integrate	right	(e.g.,
intuitive,	emotional)	and	left-brained	(analytical)	styles	in	their	processing,	while
males	will	tend	to	show	less	integration.	If	we	apply	these	findings	typologically,
we	might	expect	males	of	all	types	to	experience	a	greater	gulf	between	thinking
and	feeling	than	their	female	counterparts.	If	this	is	the	case,	it	would	further
support	the	notion	that	thinking	males	are	more	apt	to	display	extreme	T
characteristics	(e.g.,	autism)	than	thinking	females.	These	findings	might	also
predict	females	to	experience	greater	difficulty	sorting	out	their	T-F	preference
due	to	greater	communication	and	overlap	between	brain	hemispheres.
In	light	of	these	studies,	if	you	are	on	the	fence	between	T	and	F,	it	appears
warranted	to	compare	your	personality	with	the	typical	T-F	presentation	of	your
own	gender.	Thoroughly	exploring	the	specific	T	and	F	functions	(Ti,	Te,	Fi,	Fe)
will	also	help	you	clarify	your	T-F	preference.
Summary
Characteristics	of	Thinkers:
Take	a	logic-based	approach	to	reasoning	and	decision-making
Focus	on	matters	of	logic,	strategy,	logistics,	utility,	functionality,	and
classification;	strive	to	make	things	more	useful,	rational,	and	efficient
More	readily	detach	from	their	emotions	to	make	decisions	in	an
impersonal	fashion
Less	concerned	with	the	needs	and	feelings	of	others
Focus	more	on	their	own	work	and	interests
Characteristics	of	Feelers:
Consult	tastes	and	feelings	in	reasoning	and	decision-making
Enrich	life	with	colors,	sounds,	tastes,	scents,	textures,	stories,	images,	etc.
More	attuned	and	responsive	to	feelings,	both	their	own	and	those	of	others
Generally	more	caring,	compassionate,	and	nurturing
More	apt	to	divide	time	among	work,	relationships,	and/or	caregiving
Common	T-F	Mistypings
Among	the	more	prominent	causes	of	T-F	confusion	is	gender,	which	we	just
finished	discussing.	Another	common	cause	is	the	inferior	function.	ETJs	or
ITPs	caught	up	in	a	whirlwind	romance,	for	instance,	may	be	prone	to
identifying	with	their	inferior	feeling	function.	Similarly,	IFPs	or	EFJs	studying
math,	engineering,	or	other	T	subjects	may	over-identify	with	their	inferior
thinking	function.	In	such	instances,	once	the	inferior	function	need	has	been
sufficiently	quelled	or	exhausted	(e.g.,	when	a	thinker	gets	married	or	a	feeler
fatigues	of	T-related	work),	the	focus	naturally	reverts	back	to	the	dominant
function	and	the	individual	realizes	his	or	her	typing	error.
EPs	and	IJs	are	also	prone	to	struggle	with	their	T-F	designation.	One	reason	for
this	is	neither	IJs	nor	EPs	use	thinking	or	feeling	as	their	dominant	function.
Hence,	they	are	really	working	to	identify	their	auxiliary	function.	Identifying
the	auxiliary	can	be	more	difficult,	especially	early	in	life,	when	it	has	yet	to	be
fully	explored	or	developed.
More	specifically,	IFJs	are	apt	to	mistype	as	thinkers	and	ETPs	as	feelers.	This	is
because	the	I,	T,	and	J	preferences	are	all	roughly	associated	with	the	left	side	of
the	brain,	so	if	exhibiting	a	more	left-brained	style,	IFJs	(especially	ISFJs)	may
mistype	as	thinkers.	Similarly,	the	E,	F,	and	P	preferences	have	often	been
associated	with	the	right	hemisphere,	so	in	displaying	a	more	right-brained	style,
ETPs	may	misidentify	as	feelers.	It	is	therefore	particularly	important	that	IJs
and	EPs	be	capable	of	differentiating	the	various	T	and	F	functions	(Ti,	Te,	Fi,
Fe)	in	order	to	accurately	identify	their	T-F	preference.
6.	Judging	(J)	vs.	Perceiving	(P)
In	the	broadest	sense,	perceiving	refers	to	the	act	of	taking	in	information	(i.e.,
information	collecting),	while	judging	describes	the	process	of	making
judgments	and	discriminations	(i.e.,	information	evaluating).	Both	processes	are
readily	observable	outside	of	human	affairs,	with	even	the	most	rudimentary
organisms	exhibiting	stimulus	(P)-response	(J)	mechanisms.	Judging	and
perceiving	also	correspond	to	notions	of	static	(J)	versus	dynamic	(P)	scientific
and	philosophical	models.	Philosophers	have	long	debated	whether	ultimate
reality	is	static	and	unchanging	(J)	or	forever	in	flux	(P).	Similarly,	physicists
have	toiled	to	determine	whether	physical	reality	is	composed	of	waves	(P)	or
particles	(J).
Jung	did	not	use	the	J-P	label	to	describe	the	types.	The	J-P	indicator	was	added
later	by	Myers	and	Briggs.	As	we	saw	in	the	Introduction,	it	is	largely	concerned
with	outward	behavior	and	attitudes.	More	specifically,	it	indicates	whether	the
first	extraverted	function	in	a	type’s	functional	stack	is	an	extraverted	judging
function	(i.e.,	Fe	or	Te)	or	an	extraverted	perceiving	function	(i.e.,	Ne	or	Se).
This	approach	is	rather	straightforward	for	extraverts,	since	their	first	extraverted
function	also	happens	to	be	their	dominant	function.	There	is	no	confusion,	for
instance,	in	calling	an	ENFP	a	perceiver	or	an	ENTJ	a	judger,	since	this
accurately	portrays	the	dominant	mode	of	operation	for	these	types.
For	introverted	types,	however,	J	and	P	can	be	a	source	of	confusion	and
misunderstanding.	This	is	due	to	the	fact	that	introverts’	first	extraverted
function	is	auxiliary	rather	than	dominant.	Consequently,	the	J-P	designation	of
IPs	and	IJs	does	not	describe	the	nature	of	their	dominant	function.	As	strange	as
it	may	sound,	IPs’	preferred	and	dominant	mode	of	functioning	is	judging	(Fi	or
Ti)	and	IJs’	is	perceiving	(Si	or	Ni).
Making	matters	worse,	there	is	a	fair	amount	of	misinformation	regarding	what
constitutes	J-P	characteristics.	Some	typology	authors	or	websites,	for	instance,
make	claims	like:	“P	types	are	messy,	disorganized,	procrastinators,	and
chronically	late.”	Or,	“J	types	are	neat,	tidy,	organized,	and	uptight.”	We	can
understand	the	origins	of	these	assumptions	if	we	think	of	judging	as	“static	and
predictable”	and	perceiving	as	“fluid	and	unpredictable.”	Unfortunately,	these
things	rarely	play	out	so	neatly	in	reality.	There	are	simply	too	many
confounding	variables	involved.
In	light	of	this,	it	appears	we	have	our	work	cut	out	for	us	with	respect	to
clarifying	the	core	characteristics	of	Js	and	Ps.	Before	diving	into	the	specifics,
however,	I	would	like	to	start	with	broad	overviews	of	Js	and	Ps,	giving	due
emphasis	to	their	outer	presentation:
J	types	are	outwardly	firm,	direct,	and	opinionated.	They	are	more	inclined	to
directly	express	their	views	and	wishes	by	way	of	declarative	statements	(e.g.,	“I
feel	that…”	or	“I	don’t	like…”or	“We	should…”).	Hence,	others	often	turn	to
them	in	situations	requiring	a	firm	decision	or	answer.	This	contributes	to	their
status	as	potential	leaders,	teachers,	or	managers.	Their	tone	and	mannerisms
also	convey	a	sense	of	closure	that	may	cause	them	to	appear	more	formal	or
serious	in	their	presentation.	Despite	what	many	type	descriptions	may	suggest,
they	are	not	necessarily	neat,	tidy,	organized,	uptight,	or	punctual.
P	types,	by	contrast,	are	outwardly	open,	receptive,	and	adaptable.	They	are	less
apt	to	declare	their	opinions	or	impose	their	will	on	others.	They	tend	to	express
things	in	an	open-ended	(e.g.,	“What	do	you	think	about…?”)	rather	than
declarative	fashion.	They	are	often	perceived	as	good	listeners	and	non-
judgmental	in	their	attitude	toward	others,	exuding	an	air	of	openness	and
informality.	Contrary	to	some	conceptions,	they	are	not	necessarily	messy,
disorganized,	procrastinating,	or	chronically	late.
As	a	word	of	warning,	there	are	parts	of	this	chapter	that	may	seem	a	bit
complicated	or	confusing.	But	try	not	to	worry.	At	the	end	of	this	chapter,	I’ve
included	a	summary	of	important	J-P	characteristics	that	should	give	you	a	good
sense	of	your	overall	preference.	We	will	also	revisit	and	expound	on	some	of
these	issues	in	Chapter	16.	As	usual,	try	not	to	get	too	hung	up	on	particulars	and
focus	instead	on	seeing	your	overall	preference.	Also,	because	the	J-P	preference
is	based	largely	on	how	you	present	outwardly,	you	may	find	it	helpful	to	ask
others	where	they	see	you	on	the	J-P	spectrum.
Structured	(J)	vs.	Unstructured	(P)
Judging	is	often	associated	with	a	preference	for	structure,	especially	external
structure.	There	is	some	truth	to	the	notion	of	J	types	having	a	stronger
preference	(or	tolerance)	for	outer	structure	than	P	types.	Js	tend	to	be	more	at
home,	for	instance,	in	structured	work	environments.	P	types,	by	contrast,	can
feel	bored,	restless,	or	stifled	when	surrounded	by	too	much	structure.	While	Ps
don’t	mind	imposing	structure	on	themselves	or	their	surroundings,	they	dislike
feeling	controlled	or	constrained	from	without.
With	that	said,	a	preference	for	external	structure	does	not	necessarily	translate
into	being	neat	or	tidy.	I	have	met	plenty	of	IJs,	for	example,	who	show
diminished	concern	or	effort	with	respect	to	being	neat,	tidy,	or	organized.	Of	all
types,	ESTJs	seem	most	concerned	with	being	neat	and	tidy,	since	an	orderly
living	space	can	be	associated,	to	some	extent,	with	S	(i.e.,	attention	to	concrete
matters),	and	to	a	larger	extent,	with	Te	(especially	dominant	Te).
Planned	(J)	vs.	Open-Ended	(P)
The	J	preference	is	commonly	associated	with	planning	ahead,	while	Ps	prefer	to
keep	things	more	open-ended.	Since	planning,	by	definition,	involves	reflection
before	action,	introversion	may	also	contribute	to	a	propensity	for	planning.
Hence,	IJs	are	predicted	to	function	as	the	most	careful	planners.	They	are
particularly	likely	to	plan	(often	extensively)	for	special	events	involving	other
people,	such	as	vacations,	holidays,	birthdays,	and	so	on.
As	we	will	soon	discuss,	P	types	can	be	rather	indecisive.	And	because	planning
requires	that	decisions	be	made	in	advance,	Ps	are	prone	to	putting	off	or	even
forgoing	planning	altogether.	This	is	especially	true	if	the	event	involves	other
people	or	falls	outside	their	primary	interest	area.	When	confronted	by	others
inquiring	about	plans,	Ps	are	inclined	to	think	or	say	things	like	“We’ll	figure	it
out”	or	“Things	will	work	out	one	way	or	another.”	From	this,	we	see	that	Ps	are
more	inclined	to	trust	the	hands	of	fate.	To	a	certain	extent,	they	even	enjoy	not
knowing	exactly	how	things	will	play	out.	They	relish	the	sense	of	mystery	and
excitement	toward	future	unknowns.	J	types,	especially	IJs,	are	apt	to	see	the	P-
approach	as	risky,	lazy,	or	foolish.	They	prefer	to	spend	more	time	planning	on
the	front-end	to	avoid	potential	frustrations	and	problems	on	the	back-end.
J	Types:	Conviction	&	Convergence
J	types,	by	definition,	are	more	outwardly	firm	and	direct	in	their	expressions.
They	exude	a	sense	of	closure	in	their	communication	and	mannerisms.	And
while	the	J-P	dimension	was	originally	formulated	to	reflect	a	type’s	outer
presentation,	in	some	respects,	the	inner	world	of	J	types	is	more	convergent	and
crystallized	than	that	of	P	types.
While	SJs	and	NJs	may	often	conceive	of	the	world	quite	differently,	they	are
similar	in	their	tendency	to	see	one	view	as	more	correct,	appropriate,	or	ideal.
Unlike	Se	and	Ne	(the	functions	used	by	SPs	and	NPs	respectively),	which	are
characteristically	divergent,	open-ended,	and	undiscriminating,	Si	and	Ni	are
more	convergent,	producing	what	amounts	to	a	singular	vision	of	things.
As	we	will	discuss	in	future	chapters,	SJs’	Si	effectively	takes	the	entirety	of	an
individual’s	past	experiences	and	condenses	them	into	a	limited	set	of
perspectives,	habits,	and	routines.	SJs	use	this	condensed	past	as	a	blueprint	for
informing	present	and	future	behavior.	NJs’	Ni	also	functions	convergently,
subconsciously	synthesizing	information	to	produce	insights,	answers,	and
explanations.	The	inner	clarity	and	convergence	of	Si	and	Ni	beget	greater
consistency	and	predictability	(J)	in	both	thought	and	action.
Since	their	ideation	is	less	susceptible	to	significant	perturbations	or	fluctuations,
J	types	seem	to	have	an	easier	time	drawing	firm	conclusions	about	their
personality	type.	They	are	also	less	sensitive	to,	or	concerned	with,	potential
exceptions	to	their	beliefs	and	worldview.	While	P	types	may	be	rattled	by	a
single	exception	or	contradiction,	J	types	are	typically	more	resilient	and
steadfast	in	their	convictions.
P	Types:	Exploring	&	Experimenting
P	types,	especially	NPs,	find	it	difficult	not	to	see	things	as	grey	or	ambiguous,
including	their	personality	type,	career	path,	relationships,	etc.	For	NPs,	this	can
be	attributed	to	their	Ne	function,	which	specializes	in	injecting	uncertainty	into
things.	Ne	sees	multiple	explanations	and	possibilities	for	nearly	anything.
Consequently,	privileging	a	single	vision	or	version	of	reality	can	prove	difficult
for	NPs,	especially	in	the	first	half	of	life.	They	are	your	quintessential	seekers,
explorers,	and	wanderers.
SPs	also	exhibit	diminished	convergence	and	conviction	compared	to	their	SJ
counterparts.	While	SPs	may	not	fluctuate	philosophically	in	the	way	of	NPs,
they	may	show	significant	uncertainty	with	respect	to	practical	matters,	such	as
finding	the	right	career	or	romantic	partner.
The	primary	means	by	which	P	types	move	toward	convergence	is	trial-and-error
experimentation.	This	may	involve	exploring	new	ideas,	experiences,	or
possibilities.	P	types	need	ample	time	to	explore	and	experiment	before	they	can
reach	anything	resembling	a	sense	of	closure.
From	the	J	perspective,	Ps	may	appear	like	rats	in	a	maze,	blindly	exploring	all
the	different	pathways	and	frequently	encountering	dead-ends.	As	we	saw
earlier,	IJs,	in	particular,	feel	that	greater	foresight	obviates	the	need	for
excessive	experimentation	or	risk-taking.	But	P	types	tend	to	lack	confidence	in
foresight.	NPs,	in	particular,	may	foresee	many	options,	but	lack	the
discrimination	or	sense	of	inner	conviction	to	know	which	is	best.	They
therefore	feel	it	necessary	to	explore	and	experiment	with	all	the	options	(i.e.,
exhausting	all	the	“dead-ends”)	in	order	to	make	their	way	through	the	maze	and
reach	a	point	of	closure.
Seeking	vs.	Experiencing	Closure
It	is	often	said	that	J	types	prefer	closure.	This	notion	may	derive	from	their
tendency	to	plan	ahead,	as	well	as	from	the	firm	and	direct	nature	of	their
expressions.	And	while	it	is	generally	true	that	J	types	experience	more	closure
and	convergence	in	their	beliefs	(see	above),	it	is	inaccurate	to	suggest	that	all	J
types	seek	closure	in	their	beliefs.
It	is	primarily	EJs,	not	so	much	IJs,	who	can	be	understood	as	seeking	closure	in
their	beliefs.	Since	IJs’	dominant	function	(Si	or	Ni)	is	a	perceiving	function,	it
seems	somewhat	contradictory	to	suggest	that	IJs	are	preoccupied	with	closure,
at	least	not	inwardly.	As	inner	perceivers,	IJs	are	actually	far	more	leisurely	and
easygoing	inwardly	than	they	may	appear	outwardly.
In	light	of	the	fact	that	the	judging	functions	are	charged	with	decision-making
and	can	thereby	be	seen	as	“seeking	closure,”	it	stands	to	reason	that	types	with	a
dominant	judging	function	(i.e.,	IPs	and	EJs)	would	be	the	most	preoccupied
with	seeking	closure	or	convergence.	This,	combined	with	our	earlier	discussion
of	Js	experiencing	closure,	leads	to	the	following	suppositions:
EJs	actively	seek	and	readily	experience	closure
EPs	neither	strongly	seek	nor	readily	experience	closure
IJs	experience,	but	do	not	strongly	seek,	closure
IPs	seek,	but	do	not	readily	experience,	closure
This	illustrates	a	point	we	will	further	discuss	in	Chapter	16,	which	is	that	EPs
are	well	understood	as	the	“purest”	perceivers	and	EJs	as	the	“purest”	judgers.
IJs	and	IPs,	however,	are	more	of	a	complicated	mixture	of	J	and	P
characteristics.	IJs	are	more	open	and	easygoing	inwardly	than	they	let	on
outwardly,	while	IPs’	outer	adaptability	belies	their	inner	seriousness	and
intentionality.
The	Laws	of	Js	&	Ps
We	often	think	of	J	types	as	the	“lawmakers.”	This	is	largely	due	to	the	fact	that
their	judging	function	(Te	or	Fe)	is	extraverted.	In	being	more	concerned	with
outer	order	and	structure,	they	are	more	prone	to	creating	and	enforcing
collective	laws	and	standards.	SJs,	in	particular,	may	display	an	authoritarian
bent,	feeling	that	people	should	“fall	in	line”	and	“obey	the	rules.”
It	may	come	as	a	surprise	then	to	hear	that	P	types	are	equally	disposed	to
lawmaking.	They	differ	from	Js,	however,	with	respect	to	the	target	and	direction
of	their	lawmaking	efforts.	Namely,	P	laws,	created	and	instituted	by	Fi	or	Ti,	are
introverted	in	their	direction	and	focus.	They	are	concerned	with	regulating	and
directing	the	self	and	its	activities.	Hence,	Ps	can	be	seen	as	living	according	to
their	own	inner	rules	and	dictates.	They	are	naturally	averse	to	external	rules	and
directives,	with	TPs	being	most	repelled	by	Te	rules	(e.g.,	organizational	rules,
“red	tape”)	and	FPs	by	Fe	rules	(e.g.,	various	social	norms	and	conventions).
Being	told	what	to	do	or	how	to	do	something,	particularly	when	unsolicited,	can
feel	repulsive	to	them	(e.g.,	“How	dare	you	tell	me	what	to	do	or	presume	to
know	what	is	best	for	me!”).	This	is	particularly	true	for	IPs,	whose	inner	law-
making	function	(Fi	or	Ti)	is	dominant.	In	light	of	their	aversion	to	collective
rules,	P	types	are	often	viewed	as	more	rebellious	and	unconventional	(especially
NPs).	They	inject	chaos	into	J	attempts	at	outer	order	and	cohesiveness.
Unlike	J	laws,	which	are	externally	directed	and	therefore	readily	revealed,	P
laws	are	often	concealed	from	the	outside	observer.	So	unless	you	happen	to	be
the	P	who	crafted	the	law,	you	may	never	get	a	clear	sense	of	what	it	is.	You	may
be	able	to	make	inferences	about	it,	based	on	behavioral	or	other	clues,	but
outside	of	a	concerted	attempt	to	inquire	into	it,	it	may	remain	rather	inscrutable.
In	light	of	the	above,	it	is	not	surprising	that	Ps	and	Js	are	susceptible	to
misunderstandings	and	conflicts	of	interest.	Like	introverts,	Ps	can	be	staunch
defenders	of	individual	liberties.	They	fight	to	ensure	that	outer	J	laws	do	not
impinge	on	their	personal	freedom.	J	types,	on	the	other	hand,	are	more	apt	to
emphasize	collective	duty	and	responsibility.	EJs	are	particularly	likely	to	put
collective	laws	before	personal	ones,	working	to	ensure	that	individual	freedoms
don’t	compromise	collective	order.
Are	J	Types	More	Responsible?	Moral?
Another	common	belief	is	that	J	types	are	more	dutiful	and	responsible	than	P
types.	Once	again,	this	supposition	is	founded	on	the	extraverted	nature	of	their	J
function,	which	makes	their	dutifulness	and	devotion	more	overt.	But	if	Ps	create
laws	to	the	same	extent	as	Js,	might	they	not	also	be	equally	dutiful	and
responsible?	After	all,	why	would	Ps	create	laws	for	themselves	if	they	had	no
intention	of	following	them?	I	suggest	Ps	are	indeed	equally	dutiful	and
responsible	as	J	types.	The	difference	is	Ps	are	dutiful	and	responsible	with
respect	to	themselves,	to	their	own	rules	and	principles,	rather	than	to	collective
standards	(here	again,	we	see	some	similarities	between	introverts	and
perceivers).
This	issue	cuts	right	to	the	heart	of	typological	and	moral	theory.	Namely,	for	P
types,	there	is	the	sense	that	morality	is	not	based	on	following	laws	“out	there,”
but	following	laws	“in	here.”	From	the	J	perspective,	Ps	acting	according	to	an
unseen	inner	law	might	be	viewed	as	acting	immorally,	especially	if	the	P	law
contradicts	an	existing	outer	law.	From	the	P	perspective,	however,	she	is	acting
dutifully	and	responsibly	according	to	her	own	inner	dictates.
This	is	not	to	say	that	J	types	don’t	also	have	an	inner	moral	compass.	But	the
fact	remains	that	Js’	primary	judging	function	(Fe	or	Te)	is	directed	outwardly,
whereas	Ps’	(Ti	or	Fi)	is	self-referencing.	These	differences	are	most	clearly
evidenced	when	comparing	EJs	and	IPs.
Restlessness	&	Breadth	of	Activities
As	inner	perceivers	(Si	or	Ni),	IJs	are	the	least	dependent	of	all	types	on	outside
stimulation.	They	can	sit	for	hours	in	one	place	without	feeling	restless	or
compelled	to	change	activities.	Because	they	are	less	impulsive	and	their
perceptions	are	more	convergent,	they	tend	to	be	less	restless—both	mentally
and	physically.
P	types,	by	contrast,	are	more	restless,	impulsive,	and	divergent	in	their
perceptions.	They	are	stimulated	by	a	breadth	of	external	input,	be	it	through	Ne
or	Se.	They	find	it	harder	to	stay	perched	in	one	place	before	getting	the	itch	to
do	something	else	(especially	EPs).	They	seem	to	need	more	diversity	in	their
activities	to	remain	engaged	and	stimulated.	In	this	sense,	there	may	be
something	to	the	notion	of	Ps	being	more	fluid	and	changeable,	since	their
restlessness	often	demands	it.
J-P	&	Work
Our	J-P	preference	also	affects	the	type	of	work	and	workplace	we	prefer.	We’ve
already	discussed	how	Js	are	more	inclined	to	feel	comfortable	in	structured
environments,	preferring	more	consistency	or	predictability	in	their
surroundings.	Too	much	external	change	or	chaos	may	force	J	types	to	use
extraverted	perceiving	rather	than	their	preferred	mode	of	introverted	perceiving.
P	types,	by	contrast,	are	stimulated	by	outer	change	and	diversity.	Settings	that
are	too	static	or	sterile	can	feel	stifling	and	uninspiring	to	them.
Our	next	consideration	is	what	types	of	work	are	most	optimal	and	fulfilling	for
Js	and	Ps.	Since	the	J	mind	is	more	convergent	in	nature,	it	is	better	suited	for
work	requiring	the	development	of	convergent	solutions	(NJs),	following
specific	policies	and	protocols	(SJs),	or	managing	/	advising	/	teaching.	A	central
work	activity	for	NJs	is	analysis,	whether	involving	human	(NFJs)	or	non-human
systems	(NTJs).	For	SJs,	working	according	to	pre-established	guidelines	is
desirable.
The	P	mind,	as	we’ve	seen,	is	more	divergent,	making	it	well-suited	for	a	variety
of	work	activities,	including	opportunities	to	function	creatively	or
spontaneously.	For	NPs,	a	key	work	activity	is	divergent	thinking.	For	NFPs,	this
may	involve	working	as	writers,	musicians,	designers,	or	artists,	while	NTPs
may	find	creative	outlets	in	fields	like	engineering,	non-fiction	writing,
journalism,	or	creative	entrepreneurship.	For	SPs,	satisfying	work	often	involves
opportunities	to	respond	to	concrete	challenges.	SFPs	may	enjoy	working	as
nurses,	therapists,	or	caregivers,	while	STPs	may	become	athletes,	first
responders,	mechanics,	surgeons,	etc.
Learning	&	Teaching	Styles
J	types	are	often	said	to	be	more	formal	or	traditional	in	their	methods	and
preferences	than	P	types.	This	is	clearly	the	case	when	it	comes	to	teaching	and
learning.
Js	are	typically	at	home	with	“traditional”	modes	of	education.	They	believe	in
the	time-honored	roles	of	teacher	and	pupil.	They	also	tend	to	gravitate	toward
conventional	career	paths,	including	seeking	formal	endorsements,	such	as
college	degrees	and	professional	licenses.	Obtaining	a	degree	or	license	grants
them	the	sense	of	confidence	and	legitimacy	they	desire	before	moving	forward
in	their	work.
P	types,	by	contrast,	are	more	skeptical	toward	traditional	educational	methods
and	more	open	to	unconventional	alternatives.	This	is	due,	at	least	in	part,	to
their	desire	for	self-directed	learning.	Just	as	they	like	to	make	their	own	laws,
they	also	like	to	be	in	charge	of	what	and	how	they	learn.	Ps	can	also	be	more
tepid	about	degrees	and	licensing,	feeling	that	the	most	talented	or	qualified
people	are	not	necessarily	the	ones	with	degrees.	ITPs,	in	particular,	may	feel
they	can	“make	something	of	themselves”	from	the	ground	up,	obviating	the
need	to	obtain	a	degree	simply	to	placate	prospective	employers.
Js	are	also	naturally	inclined	to	teach,	advise,	and	instruct	others.	What	is
interesting	about	J	teachers	is,	because	their	introverted	judging	function	(Ti	or
Fi)	comes	after	their	extraverted	judging	function	(Te	or	Fe)	in	their	functional
stack,	they	may	not	have	personally	mastered	whatever	they	happen	to	be
teaching	(especially	if	involving	a	practical	skill).	In	other	words,	they	may	be
better	at	teaching	and	correcting	others	than	teaching	or	improving	themselves.
While	often	making	excellent	teachers,	their	slowness	in	applying	their	own
advice	may	at	times	earn	them	unwanted	recognition	as	hypocrites	(especially
EJs).
Ps	are	the	opposite.	They	are	naturally	better	at	teaching	themselves	than
teaching	others.	Since	their	first	judging	function	(Ti	or	Fi)	is	introverted,	they
are	wired	to	personally	trial	information	before	distributing	it	outwardly.	Hence,
if	they	are	going	to	teach	at	all,	they	often	prefer	to	do	so	by	example.	P	athletes,
for	instance,	may	simply	advise	their	understudies	to	“watch	and	learn.”	Ps	may
also	teach	by	facilitation.	Instead	of	lecturing	(a	favored	method	among	Js),	P
facilitators	ask	questions	and	encourage	students	to	personally	explore	and
experiment	with	a	topic,	encouraging	self-guided	learning.	Montessori	schooling
is	a	great	example	of	a	P	approach	to	teaching	and	learning,	honoring	and
promoting	individuality	in	the	learning	process.
To	further	illustrate	these	J-P	differences,	consider	this	example.	An	INTJ	friend
and	I	often	talk	about	online	marketing	strategies.	He	enjoys	reading	about	the
latest	and	greatest	techniques,	then	proceeds	to	advise	me	how	I	should	move
forward.	He	has	said	on	more	than	one	occasion,	“I	would	much	rather	teach
these	things	than	implement	them	myself.”	As	a	self-directed	INTP,	there	is
never	a	time	when	I	automatically	implement	his	advice.	I	do,	however,	take	it
into	consideration.	And	unlike	my	friend,	my	first	preference	is	never	to	teach
others,	but	to	explore	and	experiment	with	things	to	see	what	works	for	me.
Closing	Remarks
As	may	be	evident	from	the	extensiveness	and	particularity	of	the	above
discussion,	the	J-P	dimension	has	long	comprised	one	of	my	primary	interest
areas.	Over	the	past	decade,	I’ve	intermittently	worked	to	refine	my
understanding	of	its	many	nuances	and	complexities.	At	one	point,	I	was	ready
to	give	up	on	typology	because	I	saw	the	J-P	dimension	as	fraught	with	problems
and	inconsistencies.	Fortunately,	I	was	able	to	hang	on	long	enough	to	reconcile
what	I	initially	saw	as	perplexing	or	contradictory.	I	am	now	convinced	of	its
conceptual	and	empirical	veracity	and	feel	fortunate	to	share	my	discoveries
with	you.	And	while	we	have	covered	many	of	the	foremost	J-P	themes	in	this
chapter,	there	remains	more	for	us	to	explore	and	review	in	Chapter	16.
Summary
Characteristics	of	J	Types:
Outwardly	firm,	direct,	and	opinionated
Undeterred	from	directly	expressing	their	views	or	wishes	(especially	EJs);
utilize	declarative	statements
Tone	and	mannerisms	convey	a	sense	of	closure,	seriousness,	or	formalness
Others	may	turn	to	them	for	answers	or	decision-making
See	planning	as	a	way	of	reducing	risk	and	ensuring	desirable	outcomes
Experience	and	express	convergence	in	beliefs	/	worldview
More	apt	to	prefer	structure	and	predictability	in	work	settings
Prefer	“traditional”	methods	of	teaching	and	learning,	such	as	lectures	or
direct	instruction
Not	necessarily	neat,	tidy,	organized,	uptight,	or	punctual
Less	restless	and	less	dependent	on	a	breadth	of	activities	for	stimulation
(especially	IJs)
Characteristics	of	P	Types:
Outwardly	open,	receptive,	and	adaptable
Can	be	reluctant	to	state	things	directly	(especially	IPs);	may	express
themselves	in	a	more	tangential	fashion	(e.g.,	using	hints	or	questions)
Are	typically	unenthusiastic	about	making	detailed	plans,	especially	when
involving	other	people;	enjoy	the	uncertainty	of	leaving	things	open-ended
Slow	to	reach	closure	in	beliefs	or	decisions
Often	viewed	as	good,	non-judgmental	listeners
Can	be	skeptical	toward	external	laws;	prefer	to	make	and	follow	their	own
rules
Desire	variety,	novelty,	informality,	and	minimal	structure	at	work
Often	prefer	to	teach	themselves	(especially	IPs);	teach	others	by	example
or	facilitation
Not	necessarily	messy,	disorganized,	procrastinating,	or	chronically	late
Often	restless,	turning	to	a	breadth	of	activities	for	stimulation	(especially
EPs)
Common	J-P	Mistypings
Perhaps	more	than	any	other	personality	dimension,	mistypings	abound	in	the	J-
P	domain.	For	reasons	we’ve	touched	on	in	this	and	earlier	chapters,	J-P
mistypings	are	particularly	common	among	introverts.	Among	the	most	frequent
is	IFPs	misidentifying	as	IFJs.	This	may	stem	from	IFPs’	status	as	inner	judgers
(Fi),	as	well	as	over-identification	with	their	inferior	Te.	They	therefore	come	to
see	themselves	as	responsible,	dutiful,	and	organized,	traits	they	associate	with
the	J	preference.	INFPs	may	also	mistake	their	Fi-Ne	combination	for	Ni,
mistaking	deep	feeling	(Fi)	combined	with	broad	intuition	(Ne)	for	deep
intuition	(Ni).
Of	all	types,	EJs	seem	least	likely	to	error	in	their	J-P	classification,	as	EJs	are	in
many	ways	the	purest	embodiment	of	judging.	And	while	most	EPs	correctly
identify	their	J-P	preference,	those	who	are	more	assertive	and	forceful	via	their
tertiary	function	(Fe	or	Te)	may	be	prone	to	mistype	as	judgers.
Other	mistypings	involve	over-focusing	on	a	given	element	of	the	J-P	dimension.
For	instance,	most	ESFPs	have	a	strong	concern	and	eye	for	aesthetics.	In
striving	to	maintain	the	appearance	of	things,	they	are	naturally	inclined	toward
tidiness.	Their	tertiary	Te	function	may	also	contribute	an	interest	in	organizing.
So	if	an	ESFP	were	to	over-emphasize	the	issue	of	external	order,	it	is	easy	to
see	how	they	might	mistype	as	ESFJs.
Part	III:	Clarifying	Your	Functions
7.	Introduction	to	the	Eight	Functions
Having	now	explored	the	eight	preferences,	you	probably	have	at	least	a	ballpark
idea	of	your	personality	type.	And	while	the	preferences	can	be	helpful	for
determining	your	personality	type	and	gaining	a	basic	understanding	of	the
ingredients	of	type,	they	do	not	give	us	the	whole	story.	To	obtain	a	deeper	level
of	understanding	and	get	“more	bang	for	our	typological	buck,”	studying	the
functions	is	a	must.
Broadly	speaking,	the	functions	can	be	conceived	as	universal	tools	of	mind.
Even	in	other	animals,	we	see	evidence	of	emotion	(F),	pragmatic	logic	(T),
instinct	/	intuition	(N),	and	sensation	(S).	Over	the	course	of	history	and
evolution,	we	see	increased	differentiation	of	these	tools,	including	the	eventual
emergence	of	the	eight	functions	and	the	sixteen	personality	types.
In	this	and	upcoming	chapters,	we	will	explore	Jung’s	eight	psychological
functions,	helping	you	further	clarify	and	understand	your	personality	type.
Introverted	vs.	Extraverted	Functions
In	this	book’s	Introduction,	we	touched	on	the	how	the	four	basic	functions	(S,
N,	T,	and	F)	can	take	on	introverted	and	extraverted	forms.	And	while	the	S,	N,
T,	and	F	functions	retain	some	of	their	basic	properties,	their	E-I	direction	does
modify	them	in	significant	ways.	These	modifications	are	to	some	extent
predictable	based	on	what	we	know	about	introversion	and	extraversion,
involving	a	sort	of	blending	of	introversion	or	extraversion	with	the	inherent
nature	of	the	function.	Extraverted	Intuition	(Ne),	for	instance,	represents	a
blending	of	the	characteristics	of	extraversion	with	those	of	intuition.	Because	of
the	E-I	influence,	all	the	extraverted	functions	will	display	certain	similarities,
with	the	same	being	true	for	the	introverted	functions.
Like	extraverts,	the	extraverted	functions	are	concerned	with	external
phenomena:
Se	with	novel,	outer	sensations	and	experiences,	as	well	as	keeping	up
appearances
Ne	with	perceiving	and	recombining	circulating	ideas,	theories,	and
possibilities
Fe	with	establishing	interpersonal	rapport,	meeting	others’	needs,	and
observing	social	norms
Te	with	analyzing	and	optimizing	external	systems,	methods,	and
operations
Like	introverts,	the	introverted	functions	are	concerned	with	internal
phenomena:
Si	with	the	remembered	past	and	inner	sensations
Ni	with	insights	and	impressions	from	the	subconscious	mind
Fi	with	personal	feelings,	tastes,	and	morals
Ti	with	subjective	logic,	methods,	and	strategies
Just	as	extraverts	are	outgoing	and	expansive	in	their	affairs,	the	extraverted
functions	are	characteristically	broad,	extensive,	and	expansive	in	their
workings:
Se	broadly	surveys	sensations	and	experiences.
Ne	extensively	explores	and	multiplies	ideas,	patterns,	and	possibilities.
Fe	works	to	establish	broad	social	networks	and	consensus	of	values	and
feelings.
Te	multiplies	facts,	rules,	policies,	and	definitions.
Just	as	introverts	are	apt	to	display	a	narrower	bandwidth	of	activities	and
interests,	the	introverted	functions	are	narrower	in	scope	and	more	intensive	in
their	focus.	They	tend	to	reduce,	consolidate,	or	restrict	rather	than	expand	and
multiply:
Si	intensively	draws	on	a	limited	set	of	perspectives,	behaviors,	traditions,
and	conventions.
Ni	penetrates	deeply	to	identify	underlying	motives	and	causes;	its	theories
are	convergent.
Fi	deeply	explores	and	refines	personal	tastes	and	feelings;	it	may	also
emotionally	invest	in	a	select	few	individuals	or	causes.
Ti	uses	deep	logic	to	formulate	and	refine	subjective	methods	and
strategies;	it	also	takes	a	reductive	approach	toward	knowledge.
Judging	vs.	Perceiving	Functions
We	can	also	make	predictions	about	the	functions	based	on	their	status	as
judging	or	perceiving	functions.	As	we’ve	seen,	the	judging	functions	(T	and	F)
are	charged	with	making	evaluations	and	decisions	that	furnish	a	sense	of	order,
direction,	control,	and	predictability.	The	perceiving	functions	(S	and	N)	are
concerned	with	absorbing,	extracting,	retaining,	or	synthesizing	information.
They	help	us	enjoy	and	learn	about	internal	and	external	phenomena.
In	combination	with	an	E-I	direction,	we	can	understand	the	judging	functions	as
follows:
Te	seeks	to	impose	rational	order	on	external	systems;	it	is	outwardly
controlling.
Ti	imposes	rational	order	on	the	self	and	its	objectives;	it	is	concerned	with
self-regulation,	self-direction,	and	self-control.
Fe	facilitates	order	and	gives	direction	in	the	world	of	human	relations;	it
seeks	social	and	moral	order.
Fi	is	concerned	with	emotional	and	moral	order	of	the	self;	like	Ti,	it	is	self-
regulating	and	self-controlling.
When	the	perceiving	functions	take	on	an	E	or	I	direction,	we	arrive	at	the
following	formulations:
Se	surveys	a	breadth	of	external	sensations	and	experiences;	it	is
characteristically	open-ended	and	non-discriminating.
Si	retains,	condenses,	and	recollects	past	information;	it	also	perceives	inner
bodily	sensations.
Ne	surveys	and	recombines	a	breadth	of	ideas	and	possibilities;	like	Se,	it	is
characteristically	open-ended	and	non-discriminating.
Ni	collects	and	synthesizes	information	to	produce	convergent	impressions,
insights,	answers,	and	theories.
Overview	of	the	Eight	Functions
While	we	will	soon	explore	the	functions	in	greater	depth,	for	the	sake	of
convenience	and	reference,	I’ve	summarized	what	we’ve	learned	about	functions
thus	far,	providing	a	quick	overview	of	each.	For	the	extraverted	functions,	I’ve
added	observations	of	how	they	present	outwardly	(the	introverted	functions	are
not	readily	observed	from	without).
Introverted	Intuition	(Ni)	collects	conscious	and	subconscious	information,	and
then	synthesizes	it	to	produce	convergent	impressions,	insights,	answers,	and
theories.	It	sees	deep	causes,	patterns,	and	laws	underlying	sense	data.	It	is
characteristically	penetrating	and	insightful.
Extraverted	Intuition	(Ne)	surveys	and	creatively	recombines	a	breadth	of	ideas,
associations,	patterns,	and	possibilities.	It	is	characteristically	innovative,
divergent,	open-ended,	and	non-discriminating.	Outwardly,	Ne	users	may
present	as	scattered,	random,	quirky,	witty,	and	ideationally	curious.
Introverted	Sensing	(Si)	retains,	consolidates,	and	recollects	historical	and
autobiographical	information.	It	attends	to	and	draws	on	a	concentrated	body	of
past	experiences,	routines,	and	traditions	(i.e.,	the	“tried	and	true”).	It	forgoes	the
constant	pursuit	of	new	or	broad	experiences,	finding	safety	and	security	in
stability	and	consistency.	It	also	surveys	inner	bodily	sensations.
Extraverted	Sensing	(Se)	seeks	extensive	outer	stimulation	in	the	“here	and
now”—new	sights,	sounds,	tastes,	experiences,	etc.	It	is	open-ended	and	non-
discriminating	with	respect	to	new	experiences.	It	can	also	be	associated	with
image-consciousness	and	observation	skills,	displaying	a	keen	eye	for	detail.
Outwardly,	it	may	manifest	as	a	recurrent	desire	for	activities	beyond	talking
(“Let’s	do	something!”).
Introverted	Thinking	(Ti)	utilizes	deep	and	nuanced	logic	to	examine	techniques,
problems,	concepts,	or	theories.	It	seeks	self-regulation	and	self-optimization
through	the	development	of	personal	skills,	methods,	and	strategies.	It	takes	a
skeptical	and	reductive	approach	toward	knowledge.
Extraverted	Thinking	(Te)	uses	explicit	logic,	including	standardized	methods,
measurements,	policies,	and	procedures,	to	make	systems	and	operations	more
rational,	efficient,	or	effective.	This	often	involves	working	as	part	of	an
institution,	be	it	corporate,	scientific,	academic,	etc.	Outwardly,	Te	delivers
opinions	and	directives	in	a	firm,	direct,	measured,	and	unemotional	fashion.	It
may	at	times	be	perceived	as	harsh,	tactless,	or	unsympathetic.
Introverted	Feeling	(Fi)	explores	and	refines	personal	tastes	and	feelings,
contributing	to	a	strong	sense	of	personal	uniqueness.	It	is	self-regulating	and
self-controlling,	working	to	maintain	inner	emotional	and	moral	order.	It	may
also	emotionally	invest	in	a	limited	number	of	love	objects,	be	they	persons,
animals,	hobbies,	or	causes.
Extraverted	Feeling	(Fe)	surveys	a	breadth	of	human	emotions,	values,	and
morals.	It	strives	toward	interpersonal	rapport,	consensus,	and	continuity.	It	can
also	be	associated	with	effective	communication	and	social	intelligence,
facilitating	growth	and	transformation	in	others.	Outwardly,	it	delivers	opinions
and	directives	in	a	direct	yet	tactful	way,	often	with	a	sense	of	emotional	urgency
and	conviction.
8.	Introverted	Intuition	(Ni)
Primary	roles:	To	collect	conscious	and	subconscious	information,	then
synthesize	it	to	produce	impressions,	insights,	answers,	and	theories;	to	see	deep
causes,	patterns,	and	laws	underlying	sense	data
Most	prominent	in:	INTJs	&	INFJs;	also	prominent	in	ENTJs	&	ENFJs
Associated	with:	Deep	perceptiveness	and	insight,	deep	“knowing,”	theoretical
genius,	powers	of	analysis	and	focus,	advising	and	troubleshooting
Famous	INJs:	Plato,	Jesus,	Nietzsche,	Jung,	Steven	Hawking
Ni	serves	as	the	dominant	function	for	INFJs	and	INTJs,	as	well	as	the	auxiliary
for	ENFJs	and	ENTJs.	It	is	by	far	the	rarest	of	all	functions,	making	NJs	the
rarest	of	all	types.	According	to	the	MBTI	Manual,	there	are	only	about	half	the
number	of	NJs	as	NPs.	Therefore,	from	a	purely	statistical	standpoint,
individuals	unsure	of	their	status	as	an	NJ	versus	an	NP	are	far	more	likely	to	be
NPs.
Although	INJs	are	classified	as	J	types,	their	dominant	orientation	is	one	of	inner
perceiving	(Ni).	Ni	synthesizes	and	delivers	information	from	the	subconscious
mind.	INJs	often	receive	brilliant	insights	that	seem	to	come	“from	nowhere.”	Ni
can	therefore	seem	to	have	a	magical	character,	one	that	is	envied	by	other	types.
However	magical	or	supernatural	its	working	may	appear,	Ni	can	be	understood
on	a	more	rational	basis	through	the	lens	of	typology.
First,	it	is	important	to	understand	that	INJs’	inferior	function	(Se)
subconsciously	gathers	copious	amounts	of	sensory	information	from	the	outside
world.	It	then	synthesizes	and	interprets	this	data,	along	with	extant
subconscious	information,	like	assembling	pieces	of	a	puzzle.	The	end	result,
“the	finished	puzzle,”	comes	in	the	form	of	an	impression,	theory,	insight,	or
vision.	Hence,	what	the	ancients	conceived	as	“revelations	from	God”	may	be
better	understood	as	the	creative	work	of	Ni	and	the	subconscious	mind.	What	is
most	remarkable	and	least	understood	is	exactly	how	Ni	manages	to	assemble
these	puzzles	so	quickly	and	effectively.
Drawing	on	their	powers	of	Ni,	INJs	excel	when	it	comes	to	assessing	the
entirety	of	a	situation	and	quickly	“reading”	what	is	happening.	Like	the
prophets	of	old,	they	may	get	a	strong	sense	of	how	things	might	unfold	if	they
were	to	continue	along	their	current	trajectory.	While	not	going	so	far	as	to
consider	INJ	psychics,	we	might	say	they	are	skilled	at	seeing	the	“dark	skies
before	the	storm.”
When	expressed	a	la	their	auxiliary	Fe	or	Te,	INJ	impressions	are	often	rather
critical	in	nature.	INFJs,	in	particular,	can	seem	rather	negative	and	intense	in
their	pronouncements.	To	other	types,	they	may	seem	to	routinely	“make
mountains	out	of	molehills.”	In	most	cases,	however,	other	types	are	less	attuned
to	the	signs	of	the	brewing	storm.	They	may	deny	that	a	problem	even	exists
until	they	find	themselves	stuck	in	a	torrential	downpour.
An	INFJ	recently	confessed	to	me	that	she	constantly	feels	out	of	sync	with	the
world.	When	she	feels	panicked,	others	are	calm.	And	by	the	time	others	are
panicked—when	the	storm	hits—she	has	become	calm.	It’s	almost	as	though
once	INJs	have	delivered	their	critique	or	warning,	they	feel	they	have	done	all
they	can	do	and	the	issue	is	out	of	their	hands.
The	Visual	Nature	of	Ni
It	is	often	said	that	human	beings	rely	more	heavily	on	vision	than	we	do	our
other	senses.	This	seems	especially	true	of	INJs,	who	often	ascribe	a	strong
(inner)	visual	element	to	their	Ni.	INJs	often	think	by	way	of	images	rather	than
words.	Their	intuitions	may	manifest	as	symbols,	images,	dreams,	or	patterns.
The	visual	nature	of	Ni	might	also	tie	into	their	Se	inferior,	which	is	also	a
highly	visual	function.
Considering	the	visual	nature	of	Ni	and	Se,	it	is	no	surprise	that	many	INJs	are
sensitive	to	beauty—visual,	metaphorical,	or	otherwise.	The	INJ	philosopher
Jean	Paul	Sartre	once	confessed:	"I’m	only	a	desire	for	beauty."	Another	INJ,
Friedrich	Nietzsche,	famously	proclaimed	that	"Life	is	only	valuable	as	an
aesthetic	phenomenon."	This	penchant	for	beauty	helps	explain	why	so	many
INJs	enjoy	creating	or	appreciating	art.	Many	also	prefer	visual	representations
of	information,	be	it	through	pictures,	charts,	diagrams,	etc.
Visual	processing	also	seems	advantageous	for	reconciling	paradoxical	opposites
—a	signature	strength	of	Ni.	In	order	to	label	or	otherwise	describe	something	in
words,	it	must	be	extracted	and	demarcated	from	its	surrounding	context.	While
undoubtedly	useful,	this	requires	keeping	things	separate	and	distinct,	which	can
make	it	difficult	to	solve	problems	involving	competing	or	contradicting	ideas.
To	the	rational	mind,	two	contradictory	assertions	cannot	simultaneously	coexist
—one	of	the	them	must	be	rendered	false.	But	according	to	Jung,	the
unconscious	mind,	through	its	innate	creativity,	is	adept	at	reconciling	opposites
and	transcending	paradoxes.	The	beauty	of	visual	processing	is	that	it	doesn’t
have	the	same	rules	or	impediments	as	verbal	processing.	So	problems	that	seem
intractable	to	linear	or	logical	solutions	may	at	times	be	resolved	by	way	of
images	or	symbols.	Indeed,	one	reason	INJs	often	make	formidable	theorists	is
they	can	approach	problems	in	non-linear	or	non-verbal	ways,	allowing	them	to
consider	multiple	perspectives	simultaneously.	In	short,	intuition	can	at	times
solve	problems	that	logic	or	verbal	processing	cannot	because	it	is	not	bound	by
the	same	set	of	rules	or	methods.
An	INFJ	friend	of	mine	is	a	champion	of	paradoxical	or	Janusian	thinking.	In
our	discussions	of	philosophy,	she	has	repeatedly	sought	to	transcend	traditional
categorizations	and	dichotomies	by	claiming	that	reality	is	at	once	relative	and
absolute,	subjective	and	objective,	temporal	and	eternal,	etc.	Again,	to	the
rational	mind,	which	is	bound	by	such	dichotomies,	such	notions	can	be	difficult
to	comprehend,	much	less	accept.	From	the	perspective	of	Ni,	however,	there	is
a	sense	that	all	things	can	be	reconciled	through	the	special	lens	of	intuition.
Symbols	and	symbolism	also	tie	into	the	visual	nature	of	Ni	and	Se.	INJs	often
report	a	deep	sense	of	meaning	and	wholeness	when	engaging	with	symbols.
Integrating	idea	(N)	and	image	(S),	mental	(N)	and	physical	(S),	potential	(N)
and	actual	(S),	symbols	are	one	way	INJs	(and	ENPs)	attempt	to	marry	their
dominant	and	inferior	functions.	Jung	was	convinced	that	engagement	with
symbols,	whether	through	dream	analysis	or	other	means,	was	integral	to
psychospiritual	growth	and	well-being.	This	should	not	surprise	us,	of	course,
since	Jung	himself	was	likely	an	INJ.
Deep	Knowing
While	technically	not	a	judging	function,	Ni	works	convergently,	providing
singular	answers	and	solutions	to	complex	problems.	INJs	commonly	report	that
solutions	come	to	them	in	a	flash	of	insight—an	"aha!”	moment.	This	may	occur
while	dreaming	or	awake,	but	often	comes	suddenly	and	all	at	once.	Nietzsche,
most	certainly	an	INJ,	described	his	intuitive	process	in	the	following	way:
Something	profoundly	convulsive…suddenly	becomes	visible	and	audible	with
indescribable	definiteness	and	exactness…There	is	an	ecstasy	whose	terrific
tension	is	sometimes	released	by	a	flood	of	tears…There	is	a	feeling	that	one	is
utterly	out	of	hand…Everything	occurs	without	volition,	as	if	an	eruption	of
freedom,	independence,	power,	and	divinity.	The	spontaneity	of	the	images	and
similes	is	most	remarkable;	one	loses	all	perception	of	what	is	imagery	and
simile;	everything	offers	itself	as	the	most	immediate,	exact,	and	simple	means	of
expression.
While	Nietzsche	was	no	stranger	to	hyperbole,	it	is	clear	that	Ni	insights	can
break	into	consciousness	in	a	powerful	and	convincing	fashion.	This	is	why	Ni	is
often	associated	with	a	deep	sense	of	conviction	and	certainty.	Indeed,	for	INJs,
believing	something	is	not	at	all	the	same	thing	as	knowing	something.	INJs
typically	feel	they	know,	on	a	deep	intuitive	level,	that	their	insights	are	true.
They	differ	from	ENPs	in	this	respect,	who	often	fail	to	experience	the	same
degree	of	confidence	and	conviction	toward	their	intuitions.	In	most	cases,	ENPs
respond	to	their	intuitions	with	excitement	or	enthusiasm	rather	than	a	deep
sense	of	conviction	or	knowing.
Once	INJs	have	received	an	Ni	insight,	they	must	work	to	flesh	it	out.	This
involves	articulating	or	illustrating	it	in	a	way	that	others	can	understand.	This	is
where	their	auxiliary	function	(Fe	or	Te)	enters	the	picture.	Its	role	is	to	unpack
the	intuition,	sort	of	like	decompressing	a	computer	file.	This	process	can	at
times	be	difficult	and	painstaking.	It	may	even	take	longer	than	birthing	the
intuition	itself.	But	in	order	for	others	to	understand	and	get	behind	their
intuitions,	INJs	must	do	their	best	to	translate	them.	For	INTJs,	this	might	entail
producing	a	technical	framework	or	formula,	while	INFJs	might	turn	to
analogies,	illustrations,	or	metaphors.
Deep	Perception
INJs	perceive	things	quite	differently	than	other	types.	They	don’t	focus	on	or
give	credence	to	surface	appearances	in	the	way	that	ESPs	might.	Rather,	their
focus	is	more	penetrating,	diving	deep	to	uncover	hidden	causes,	motives,	and
essences.	We	might	liken	Ni	to	a	deep-sea	diver.	While	most	people	enjoy
swimming	or	snorkeling	near	the	surface	of	the	water,	Ni	seeks	to	dive	as	deeply
as	possible,	apprehending	an	entirely	different	world	than	what	is	visible	from
the	surface.
In	gaining	knowledge	and	insight	into	deeper	phenomena,	INJs	naturally	want	to
enlighten	others	about	their	insights.	Part	of	this	involves	correcting	others’
faulty	perceptions	about	people	or	the	world.	INJs	see	inaccurate	perceptions	as
dangerous	and	destructive,	as	bad	perceptions	can	only	beget	bad	ideas	and	bad
actions.	This	is	why	INJs	place	such	high	value	on	truth.	They	are	resolute	in
believing	that	truth	can	be	revealed	through	their	Ni	and	that	others	should
therefore	be	open	to	hearing	and	heeding	it.	They	can	get	discouraged	and
frustrated,	however,	when	others	fail	to	understand	or	respond	to	their	insights
with	a	similar	sense	of	gravity	or	conviction.
Deep	Theories,	Timeless	Truths
Part	of	deep	perception	is	apprehending	deep	or	timeless	truths.	Considering	the
ideas	of	INJs	such	as	Plato,	Jesus,	Jung,	or	Stephen	Hawking,	for	instance,	we
get	a	sense	of	the	profundity	and	timelessness	of	Ni	theories.	Plato	is	well-
known	for	his	“eternal	Forms,”	Jesus	for	his	doctrine	of	“eternal	life,”	Jung	for
his	theories	on	personality	types,	archetypes,	and	the	collective	unconscious	(all
of	which	are	independent	of	time),	and	Hawking	for	his	work	on	the	timeless
laws	of	physics.	One	reason	these	ideas	have	withstood	the	test	of	time	is	Ni	has
a	way	of	“getting	to	the	bottom	of	things,"	of	capturing	unchanging	essences	and
universal	truths.
Because	of	Ni’s	knack	for	navigating	metaphysical	and	other	timeless	ideas,	INJ
theorists	are	typically	more	interested	in	developing	deep,	universal	theories	than
small-scale,	historically-contingent	ones.	ENPs,	by	contrast,	who	use	Ne	as	their
dominant	function,	tend	to	exhibit	stronger	interests	in	local	or	historically-
contingent	phenomena.	This	is	because	Ne	works	transcontextually,	along	a
horizontal	axis,	and	may	fail	to	grasp	or	take	interest	in	deeper	laws	and
essences.
For	example,	ENFP	film	critics	will	often	focus	on	a	film’s	unique	and	particular
qualities—its	cast,	authorship,	cultural	and	historical	influences,	etc.	They	are
apt	to	evaluate	the	film	on	its	own	terms	and	according	to	its	own	context,
viewing	it	as	a	unique	creation	on	the	stage	of	history.	They	may	also	compare	it
to	other	films	that	Ne	brings	to	mind.	INFJ	critics,	by	contrast,	might	be	less
intrigued	by	a	film’s	particulars,	at	least	from	a	theoretical	standpoint.	While	its
unique	features	may	certainly	be	interesting	from	an	entertainment	perspective,
they	are	of	less	theoretical	interest	to	Ni.	For	Ni,	a	film’s	particulars	are	mere
iterations	of	deeper	human	patterns	(this	relates	to	our	Chapter	4	discussion	of
the	Ni	essence	of	a	table).	INFJ	critics	might	therefore	be	inclined	to	highlight
the	way	in	which	various	eternal	archetypes	manifested	in	the	film	or	how	its
depictions	of	good	and	evil	represent	projections	of	the	moral	struggles	of	the
human	psyche.
From	this,	we	can	see	how	the	INJ’s	deep	focus	has	a	way	of	stripping	away
local	and	historical	factors	in	order	to	highlight	perennial	patterns.	And	while
ENPs	may	also	be	aware	of	deep	patterns	such	as	archetypes,	archetypes	are
likely	to	play	a	smaller	or	more	tangential	role	in	their	thinking.	For	ENPs,	an
ongoing	stream	of	new	theories	and	ideas	is	typically	more	interesting	than
dwelling	on	something	as	static	as	eternal	archetypes.
Ni	&	the	Brain
In	his	book,	The	Neuroscience	of	Personality,	UCLA	personality	researcher,	Dr.
Dario	Nardi,	explores	the	neuroscientific	basis	for	the	functions.	Nardi	describes
the	Ni	brain	state	as	“zen-like,”	a	state	of	relaxed	awareness	that	straddles	the
conscious	and	unconscious	mind.	Unlike	the	Ne	mind,	which	is	characteristically
restless	and	hyperactive,	the	Ni	mind	is	more	calm	and	synchronized.	While
other	types	may	experience	something	similar	when	they	are	“in	the	zone,”	the
state	of	relaxed	awareness	is	more	of	the	default	for	INJs.	According	to	Nardi
(an	INJ	himself),	it’s	as	though	Ni	uses	the	whole	brain	to	“realize”	answers.
But	this	doesn’t	tell	the	whole	story.	There	seem	to	be	at	least	two
distinguishable	modes	of	Ni.	The	first	is	the	calm,	relaxed,	and	zen-like	state	we
just	discussed.	We	might	call	it	the	incubation	stage.	The	other	mode,	which	we
might	call	the	hatching	stage,	occurs	when	intuitions	have	completely	formed
and	are	breaking	into	full	consciousness.	This	stage	is	more	focused	and	intense,
such	as	in	our	earlier	quotation	of	Nietzsche.	During	the	hatching	stage,	the	INJ
is	in	an	even	deeper	state	of	trance	and	focus.	One	INJ	has	likened	it	to	peering
into	a	narrow	tunnel	and	sensing	that	there	is	no	limit	to	the	level	of	depth	one
can	obtain.	In	such	moments,	the	outside	world	falls	away	and	there	is	a	sense	of
full	immersion	in	the	intuition.
The	“whole-brained”	way	in	which	INJs	process	information	may	partly	explain
the	cogency	of	their	theories	and	insights,	as	well	as	their	sense	of	conviction
about	their	intuitions.	In	essence,	we	might	describe	an	Ni	“moment	of	knowing”
as	having	the	entire	brain	“on	the	same	page”	or	“the	same	wavelength.”	As	we
will	see	in	the	next	chapter,	Ne	manifests	quite	differently,	involving	random,
asynchronous	patterns	of	brain	activity.
Ni	&	the	Eyes
Though	not	addressed	by	Nardi,	eye	movements	may	serve	as	additional
empirical	clues	for	determining	when	a	particular	function	is	being	used.
Generally	speaking,	the	extraverted	functions	are	thought	to	be	associated	with	a
direct	forward	gaze	(Fe,	Te)	or	side-to-side	darting	movements	(Se	and
especially	Ne).	The	introverted	functions	appear	to	be	associated	with	a
downward	(and	potentially	upward)	gaze,	suggesting	the	attention	is	turned
inwardly.	This	make	sense	from	a	spatial	perspective	if	we	think	of	extraverted
perception	as	being	broad	(i.e.,	horizontal	axis)	and	the	introverted	functions	as
being	deep	and	inward	(i.e.,	vertical	axis).
More	specifically,	when	Ni	is	being	intensively	used,	the	eyelids	drop	to	half-
mast	as	the	gaze	orients	downward	and	converges,	as	if	looking	into	a	narrow
tunnel.	This	gaze	is	consistent	with	the	focused	and	synchronized	nature	of	the
Ni	brain	state,	which	seeks	to	zero-in	on	an	answer.	To	my	knowledge,	this
hasn’t	been	confirmed	with	careful	empirical	studies.	Nevertheless,	some
typologists	believe	the	eyes	can	clue	us	into	which	functions	are	being
employed.
There	may	also	be	a	relationship	between	Ni	and	nearsightedness.	After	all,	if
the	Ni	user’s	eyes	are	frequently	fixing	on	a	nearby	point,	opening	the	door	to
“in-sight,”	then	distant	sights	(i.e.,	extraverted	perceptions)	could	feasibly	be
neglected	or	deprioritized.	Conversely,	we	might	predict	EPs	to	be	disposed	to
farsightedness,	since	their	eyes	are	constantly	scanning	outwardly.	EJs	and	IPs,
whose	dominant	function	is	a	judging	function,	may	fail	to	display	any
consistent	pattern	in	this	regard,	since	the	eyes	are	primarily	organs	of
perception.	As	we	saw	with	eye	movements,	these	predictions,	to	my
knowledge,	have	not	been	carefully	studied.	I	mention	them	because	they	are
theoretically	interesting	and	may	provide	further	clues	for	deciphering	one’s
type.
9.	Extraverted	Intuition	(Ne)
Primary	Role:	To	broadly	explore,	synthesize,	and	express	ideas,	associations,
and	possibilities
Most	prominent	In:	ENTPs	&	ENFPs;	also	prominent	in	INTPs	&	INFPs
Associated	With:	Brainstorming,	innovative	/	artistic	/	ideational	creativity,
divergent	thinking,	holistic	/	weblike	associations,	a	nose	for	promising	new
enterprises
Famous	ENPs:	Benjamin	Franklin,	Walt	Disney,	Steve	Jobs,	Ellen	DeGeneres,
Jon	Stewart,	John	Edward
ENPs	use	Extraverted	Intuition	(Ne)	as	their	dominant	function,	while	INPs
wield	it	as	their	auxiliary	function.	Ne	is	more	divergent	and	expansive	than	its
introverted	cousin,	Ni.	NPs	feel	compelled	to	explore	all	the	options	and
possibilities	(“the	possibilities	are	endless!”),	making	it	difficult	for	them	to
draw	conclusions	or	make	decisions.	Moreover,	as	an	extraverted	function,	the
nature	and	workings	of	Ne	are	more	accessible	to	outsiders.	NPs	often	present	as
open-minded,	receptive,	creative,	inquisitive,	random,	distractible,	and	playful.
They	love	playing	with	words,	ideas,	associations,	and	quips.	Ne	quickly	sees
connections	and	associations	that	other	types	may	not,	contributing	much	in	the
way	of	wit,	cleverness,	and	ingenuity.
Because	of	the	rather	chaotic	and	random	nature	of	Ne,	some	NPs	may	struggle
with	verbal	fluency	or	ideational	cogency.	Their	speech	can	be	sporadic	and	their
ideas	incoherent	as	they	haphazardly	bounce	from	one	idea	to	the	next.	I	have
often	described	the	verbal	expression	of	Ne	as	“brainstorming	aloud.”	It’s	as	if
the	Ne	brain	is	so	flooded	with	intercoursing	ideas	that	it	struggles	to	funnel
them	into	a	linear,	streamlined	format.	This	can	at	times	render	interlocutors	lost
and	confused,	unsure	of	what	the	hyper-minded	NP	is	trying	to	say.
A	primary	function	of	Ne	is	scanning	for	relationships	or	patterns	within	pools	of
ideas.	This	may	occur	at	any	time	or	place,	but	is	often	stimulated	by	activities
like	reading,	writing,	conversing,	travelling,	watching	movies,	listening	to
music,	etc.	With	each	new	Ne	association	comes	a	sense	of	pleasure,	and
sometimes	even	excitement.	While	NPs	naturally	assume	that	everything	is
connected	in	some	fashion,	they	love	spinning	new	strands	to	add	to	their
existing	web	of	Ne	connections.
The	notion	that	everything	is	connected	can	give	Ne	a	sort	of	mystical	flavor.	It
engenders	a	sense	of	anticipation	for	what	God	or	the	universe	might	have	in
store	at	any	given	moment.	Jung’s	notion	of	synchronicity,	roughly	defined	as
the	experience	of	a	meaningful	coincidence	or	connection,	is	common	among	NP
types.	ENPs,	for	whom	Ne	is	dominant,	seem	particularly	attuned	to	“signs”	and
synchronicities	perceived	to	bring	meaning	and	direction	to	their	life.	Since	their
N	(which	we	might	roughly	associate	with	the	metaphysical)	is	extraverted,
many	NPs	are	open	to	the	idea	of	an	exterior	spiritual	realm.	Religion,	astrology,
spirits,	psychic	capacities,	and	all	varieties	of	psi	phenomena	can	be	intriguing	to
Ne	types,	especially	ENPs.	Since	Ni	is	introverted,	INJs	can	be	less	confident
about,	or	intrigued	by,	the	notion	of	external	spiritual	phenomena.
Indeed,	because	Ne	is	so	open	and	non-discriminating,	NPs	may	struggle	to	rule
anything	out	with	certainty.	For	Ne,	anything	is	within	the	realm	of	possibility.
Even	when	NPs’	Ti	or	Fi	pushes	for	conclusions,	Ne	rallies	for	further
exploration.	Ne’s	drive	for	open-ended	exploration	leads	NPs	to	entertain	a
breadth	of	perspectives.	They	can	see	truth	on	both	sides	of	an	issue	without
forming	premature	conclusions.	They	may	even	find	themselves	convinced	by
one	argument,	only	to	feel	similarly	entranced	by	its	counterpoint.
While	open-mindedness	is	undoubtedly	a	signature	strength	of	Ne,	it	can
sometimes	hamper	productivity	and	follow-through.	Leaning	too	heavily	on	Ne
can	seduce	NPs	into	chasing	rabbit	trails	that	derail	their	attempts	at	focused
work.	Ne	openness	can	also	make	NPs	uncomfortable	around	types	(typically	J
types)	whose	assertions	seem	too	firm,	conclusive,	or	unnuanced.
Skepticism	is	a	close	companion	to	Ne	openness.	In	the	same	way	NPs	struggle
to	deem	anything	false,	they	can	be	slow	to	endorse	something	as	true;	both	are
characteristics	of	a	truly	open	mind.	Ne	can	quickly	envision	alternatives	to
nearly	anything	stated	as	fact.	Making	matters	worse,	NPs	are	sensitive	to
anomalies	and	outliers,	even	to	the	point	of	discounting	(sometimes	prematurely)
an	entire	theory	on	account	of	a	single	inconsistency.
Despite	their	sensitivity	to	“holes”	or	inconsistencies	in	others’	theories,	NPs
may	not	always	apply	the	same	skepticism	to	their	own	ideas,	at	least	not
initially.	When	NPs	feel	excited	about	a	new	connection	or	idea,	they	are
inclined	to	happily	ride	their	Ne	train	of	thought	wherever	it	leads.	It	may	take	a
few	days,	after	their	initial	enthusiasm	has	waned,	for	them	to	step	back	and
consider	alternative	explanations.	In	short,	NPs	are	a	curious	admixture	of
openness	and	skepticism.	They	can	be	enthusiasts	one	moment,	skeptics	the
next.	This	can	make	life	with	an	NP	a	challenging	affair,	since	their	beliefs	and
passions	can	seem	ever-fluctuating.
Ne	can	also	be	associated	with	restlessness.	NPs	may	find	themselves	longing	to
escape	certain	situations	or	circumstances	to	experience	more	freedom,	novelty,
or	autonomy.	They	may	be	inspired	to	quit	their	job,	break	off	a	relationship,	or
ditch	a	party	in	hopes	of	discovering	something	more	interesting.	NPs	who
consistently	act	on	such	promptings	may	be	viewed	as	fickle,	erratic,	or
irresponsible.
Doubting	&	Dithering
NPs	are	hardwired	to	second-guess	themselves.	They	may	feel	wholly	confident
about	an	idea	one	day,	only	to	feel	ambivalent	toward	it	the	next.	They	find	it
difficult	not	to	see	things	as	grey	or	ambiguous.	Ne	can	have	a	destabilizing
effect	on	NPs’	psyche,	invoking	them	to	seek	more	information	ad	infinitum.	If
NPs	consistently	acquiesce	to	such	promptings,	they	can	end	up	feeling	lost	and
aimless.	At	times,	they	may	feel	overwhelmed,	even	paralyzed,	by	a	deluge	of
Ne	options.
Considering	the	non-committal	ways	of	Ne,	NPs	can	flounder	when	it	comes	to
making	big	decisions,	such	as	choosing	a	college	major,	marital	partner,	or
career	path.	They	may	find	themselves	wishing	that	external	circumstances
could	somehow	decide	for	them,	that	fate	might	step	in	and	provide	direction.
They	may	turn	to	religion,	astrology,	psychics,	or	other	sorts	of	external
signposts.	In	some	cases,	they	may,	wittingly	or	not,	even	aid	the	hands	of	fate.
If	wanting	out	of	a	bad	relationship,	for	instance,	they	may	fail	to	conjure	the
courage	or	conviction	required	to	directly	confront	their	partner.	So	instead,	they
may	passively	or	subconsciously	go	about	sabotaging	the	relationship,	hoping
that,	in	the	end,	their	partner	will	do	the	dirty	work	for	them.
Dithering	NPs	may	also	turn	to	others,	especially	to	J	types,	for	their	guidance
and	counsel.	Unfortunately,	this	often	fails	to	resolve	the	issue,	since	Ne	keeps
pushing	for	additional	perspectives	and	information.	In	some	cases,	seeking
more	information	merely	delays	the	inevitable	or	further	clouds	the	essential
issue.
While	NPs	may	yearn	for	more	certainty	in	their	lives,	absolute	certainty	is	more
of	an	ideal	than	a	reality	for	these	types.	It’s	as	though	the	order-seeking	left
brain	will	be	forever	incapable	of	keeping	pace	with	their	chaos-inducing	right
brain.	And	while	making	decisions	or	drawing	conclusions	may	feel	like	a
perpetual	thorn	in	NPs’	side,	it	is	helpful	to	remember	that	whatever	Ne	lacks	in
decisiveness	is	more	than	made	up	for	in	openness	and	creativity.
Ne	vs.	Ni
NPs	and	NJs	both	display	certain	qualities	associated	with	intuition	generally,
such	as	a	concern	for	the	ideational,	theoretical,	and	metaphysical.	Despite	these
similarities,	Ne	and	Ni	also	differ	in	some	important	ways.
Ni	interprets	narrowly	from	great	breadth	(Se),	equipping	INJs	to	sure-handedly
procure	convergent	theories,	answers,	and	insights.	Ne,	by	contrast,	interprets
broadly	from	great	depth,	drawing	from	an	intensive	storehouse	of	inner
experience	(Si).	In	consulting	Si’s	deep	knowledge	of	what	has	been,	Ne	puts
forth	a	breadth	of	possible	“what	could	be’s.”	Unlike	Ni,	Ne	feels	there	is	too
much	ground	to	cover	to	explore	any	single	topic	in	great	depth.
As	an	extraverted	function,	Ne	is	also	more	reliant	on	circulating	ideas	than	Ni
is.	NPs	turn	to	extant	theories	and	ideas	to	make	new	associations	and	to
stimulate	their	creative	process.	INJs,	by	contrast,	are	less	reliant	on	circulating
ideas,	turning	inward	for	answers	and	insights	(Ni).	NPs	can	therefore	be	seen	as
more	dependent	on	the	outside	world	for	their	N	processing	than	INJs	are.	This
difference	is	evident	when	comparing	ENP	and	INJ	intellectuals.	Namely,	ENPs
seem	more	concerned	with	knowing	which	thinkers	and	theories	are	in	vogue.
They	are	also	notorious	for	“name	dropping,”	constantly	referencing	various
books	or	theorists	to	support	their	arguments.	
Webs	(Ne)	&	Hierarchies	(Ni)
Ne	and	Ni	also	differ	in	how	they	perceive	and	handle	information.	The	Ne
approach	can	be	envisioned	as	holistic,	horizontal,	or	weblike.	When	it	comes	to
the	issue	of	health,	for	instance,	NPs	gravitate	toward	various	“holistic”
perspectives	that	view	health	as	a	sort	of	crossroads	of	mind,	body,	and	spirit.
To	illustrate,	imagine	the	concept	of	health	centered	in	a	web	of	related	concepts.
If	each	of	these	concepts	was	placed	in	its	own	circle,	we	would	see	a	number	of
different	concepts	overlapping	with	the	concept	of	health.	It	is	through	these
sorts	of	horizontal	associations	and	overlaps	that	Ne	goes	about	understanding
the	world.
NPs	also	rely	heavily	on	contrasts	and	comparisons,	a	method	I	employ	routinely
throughout	this	book.	Instead	of	simply	defining	the	personality	functions	on
their	own	terms,	I	frequently	compare	and	contrast	them	with	related	functions.
For	NPs,	contrasts	and	comparisons	are	preferred	to	explicit	definitions.	NPs
trust	the	process	of	emergent	understanding,	sensing	that	the	mind	will	make	the
appropriate	connections	and	“read	between	the	lines."	This	all	relates	to	a
process	called	“holistic	spiraling,”	which	Ben	Kovitz	nicely	describes	as
follows:
"One	makes	a	contrast	or	comparison	to	establish	reference	for	a	term,	then	uses
that	term	to	state	a	proposition.	That	proposition	is	then	contrasted	or	compared
with	other	propositions…In	contrast	to	rhetoric	guided	by	Te,	the	conclusion
cannot	be	stated	at	the	beginning.	Nearly	all	of	the	rhetoric	is	concerned
primarily	with	establishing	a	shared	understanding	of	reference	points	in	reality,
in	terms	of	which	the	conclusion	will	be	framed.	The	rhetoric	of	Te	more
typically	begins	with	a	conclusion	framed	in	terms	of	an	already	shared
conceptual	framework,	followed	by	reasons	to	establish	that	conclusion..."
For	Ne,	conclusions	cannot	be	stated	at	the	outset,	but	are	anticipated	to	emerge
organically	over	time.	In	this	sense,	Ne	resembles	what	are	commonly	known	as
“bottom-up”	or	“grassroots”	approaches.	In	bottom-up	systems,	such	as	a	pure
democracy,	the	outcome	of	a	vote	is	never	known	at	the	outset.	New	laws	or
policies	are	the	result,	not	the	starting	point,	of	the	process.	We	see	a	similar
process	at	work	in	NP	writers.	Part	of	my	own	writing	process,	for	instance,
involves	blindly	following	the	flow	of	Ne	consciousness	wherever	it	leads.	I
hardly	ever	know	exactly	where	my	writing	is	heading,	and	I	often	find	myself
surprised	by	the	new	associations	and	directions	that	emerge	over	time.	Hence,
my	early	drafts	can	be	rather	chaotic	and	disjointed.
Ni	can	be	viewed	as	more	linear,	vertical,	or	hierarchical	in	its	approach	(this	is
partly	why	NJs	are	often	viewed	as	more	“left-brained”	than	NPs).	It	penetrates
deep	rather	than	wide,	seeing	things	in	terms	of	structured	hierarchies	rather	than
webs	(especially	when	paired	with	Te).	NTJs,	in	particular,	prefer	clear	and
explicit	definitions	and	structure.	As	we	saw	in	the	quote	by	Kovitz,	their
rhetoric	often	commences	with	a	set	of	definitions	or	conclusions.
Unsurprisingly,	this	is	exactly	what	we	see	in	“top-down”	approaches.	One	can
observe	this,	for	instance,	in	companies	where	executives	make	decisions	and
issue	directives,	while	those	lower	in	the	hierarchy	are	expected	to	carry	out
those	orders.	The	organization	of	a	text	book—replete	with	headings,
subheadings,	definitions,	and	so	on—is	another	example	of	top-down,
hierarchical	structuring.
Like	NPs,	NJ	writers	also	tap	into	a	stream	of	N	consciousness.	The	difference
between	the	Ne	and	Ni	writing	process	is	largely	one	of	foresight	and	structure.
Namely,	NJs	seem	to	have	a	clearer	upfront	sense	of	where	they	are	headed	with
their	writing.	Similar	to	what	we	saw	with	Ni	intuitions,	there	is	a	sense	of
knowing	that	permeates	the	NJ	writing	process.	In	some	respects,	NJs	may	feel
they	are	merely	transcribing	what	they	already	know,	while	NPs	feel	they	are
exploring	and	discovering	surprising	new	connections	at	every	turn.	It’s	like	the
difference	between	describing	and	analyzing	what	one	already	sees	versus
creatively	piecing	something	together	from	scratch.	The	Ne	process	seems	more
“blind”	than	that	of	Ni	(this	relates	to	the	maze	metaphor	used	to	describe	P
types	in	Chapter	6).
Because	of	the	more	convergent	nature	of	Ni,	NJs’	writing	also	tends	to	be	more
naturally	structured,	constrained,	and	streamlined.	They	have	fewer	possibilities
to	contend	with	than	the	divergent	minds	of	NPs.	This	makes	NJs	well-suited	for
certain	types	of	academic,	scientific,	technical,	or	non-fiction	writing,	while	NPs
often	feel	more	at	home	with	poetry,	fiction,	or	more	open-ended	varieties	of
non-fiction.
In	light	of	the	above	differences,	NJs	and	NPs	may	fail	to	see	eye-to-eye	with
regard	to	both	the	content	and	structuring	of	information.	More	specifically,	NJs
can	be	dismissive	of	what	they	see	as	the	“superficial”	associations	of	Ne,	as
well	as	the	holistic	(or	what	NJs	might	consider	“arbitrary”	or	“chaotic”)	nature
of	Ne	rhetoric.	Returning	to	our	earlier	example,	NJs	will	generally	agree	that
health	is	influenced	by	a	breadth	of	factors.	However,	they	typically	see	Ne
conceptions	of	“holistic	health”	as	hopelessly	vague	and	not	particularly	helpful.
Toward	the	end	of	greater	specificity	and	operational	usefulness,	NJs	prefer	to
approach	the	mind	and	body	as	two	separate	systems,	which	they	feel	should
remain	distinct	with	respect	to	both	theory	and	practice.	NJs	are	far	less	open	to,
or	enthusiastic	about,	blurring	or	muddling	the	boundaries	between	disciplines
(e.g.,	“interdisciplinary	studies”)	than	horizontally-minded	NPs	tend	to	be.	Due
to	the	narrower	and	more	in-depth	approach	of	Ni,	NJs	see	disciplinary
boundaries	as	essential	to	plumbing	the	depths	of	any	subject	area.
Art,	Nature,	&	Lifestyle
NPs	and	NJs	also	differ	in	their	lifestyle	preferences,	as	well	as	in	their	attitudes
toward	art	and	nature.	NPs,	especially	INFPs,	are	often	well-described	as
"earthy”	in	both	appearance	and	lifestyle.	The	hippy	culture	is	emblematic	of
many	of	the	attitudes	and	fashions	of	NP	types.	Female	NPs	tend	to	go	lighter	on
make-up	and	are	generally	less	concerned	with	looking	“pretty”	(Se)	than	they
are	with	dressing	creatively	or	idiosyncratically	(Ne).	Designer	clothing,	high-
priced	meals,	or	extravagant	vacations	are	rarely	high	on	their	priority	list.
Many	NPs	(especially	INFPs)	are	lovers	of	nature,	not	to	mention	anything
“natural”	or	“organic.”	They	may	take	to	trails,	mountains,	or	the	woods	to	“find
themselves”	or	“reconnect	with	nature.”	Vegans	and	vegetarians	are	also
commonplace	among	NPs,	as	are	those	drawn	to	mind-body	practices	like	yoga
and	meditation.	NPs	are	keen	on	exploring	and	invoking	the	natural	or
“spiritual”	healing	capacities	of	the	mind	and	body.	In	the	same	vein,	many	are
intrigued	with	Eastern	philosophies	and	religions.
NPs	commonly	content	themselves	with	rather	meager	or	Bohemian	living
arrangements.	Their	living	spaces	are	often	adorned	with	an	array	of	second-
hand	furniture	and	decor.	Some	NPs	will	join	communes,	try	their	luck	with	van
living,	or	explore	other	alternative	lifestyles.	Such	offbeat	lifestyles	appeal	to
their	Si’s	propensity	for	material	conservativism,	as	well	as	their	Ne’s	penchant
for	creatively	crafting	makeshift	solutions.
While	some	NPs	may	take	interest	in	the	fine	arts,	they	are	typically	rather
unpretentious	about	it.	They	make	little	distinction	in	value	between	“the	arts”
and	more	everyday	sorts	of	crafts.	This	is	likely	due	to	the	fact	that,	like	SJs
(who	also	use	Ne-Si),	one	of	NPs’	chief	artistic	interests	involves	recombining
(Ne)	existing	resources	(Si).	They	even	do	this	with	their	dress.	Rather	than
constantly	running	out	to	buy	new	clothes	(like	ESPs	might),	they	cleverly	piece
together	“new”	outfits	from	their	existing	wardrobe.
On	the	whole,	NJs	tend	to	be	more	traditional	and	conventional	in	both	their
appearance	and	lifestyle.	While	they	(especially	INFJs)	may	go	through
unconventional	periods	in	which	they	feel	compelled	to	express	their	uniqueness
through	bizarre	fashions	or	fetishes,	their	need	to	do	so	is	typically	short-lived.
NJs	are	less	apt	to	pepper	themselves	with	tattoos,	experiment	with	drugs,	or
sample	alternative	lifestyles.	In	fact,	many	gravitate	toward	the	opposite	end	of
the	spectrum,	opting	for	a	life	of	finery	and	sophistication	(especially	NFJs).
Many	NFJs	relish	fine	food,	clothing,	and	the	arts	(not	the	crafts!).	They	can
therefore	seem	more	pretentious	than	NP	types,	at	least	with	respect	to	these
sorts	of	S	matters.
Ne-Ni	Skepticism	&	Envy
NJs	can	be	wary	and	skeptical	of	the	ways	and	products	of	Ne.	They	may
criticize	NPs	for	their	lack	of	ideational	depth	or	cogency.	Since	Ne	rambling
tends	to	disrupt	the	more	focused	and	streamlined	workings	of	Ni,	they	may	also
feel	frustrated	or	disoriented	when	engaging	with	a	chatty	NP	type.	In	addition,
they	may	see	Ne	methods	as	largely	inefficient	and	ineffective,	consuming	far
too	much	time	and	energy	in	formulating	new	ideas	at	every	turn.	NJs	are	apt	to
view	their	own	Ni	approach	as	far	more	efficacious,	at	least	when	it	comes	to
producing	convergent	answers	or	insights.
With	that	said,	there	are	also	times	when	NJs	may	find	themselves	a	bit	jealous
of	NPs.	They	may	envy	NPs’	ability	to	bring	forth	their	N	into	the	world	in	overt
ways	(i.e.,	to	extravert	N),	such	as	through	art,	humor,	innovation,	and	the	like.
Because	Ne	is	extraverted,	NPs	tend	to	wear	their	N	on	their	sleeves,	readily
showcasing	their	N	talents.	NJs	may	wish	their	powers	of	N	(rather	than	their
extraverted	J	function)	could	be	revealed	and	esteemed	as	readily.	They	may	also
envy	NPs’	willingness	to	take	risks	and	act	in	enterprising	ways.
Similarly,	NPs	can	have	a	love-hate	relationship	with	Ni.	They	may	criticize
what	they	see	as	NJs’	failure	to	acknowledge	or	appreciate	the	value	of
horizontal	or	weblike	thinking.	They	may	also	see	NJs	as	erecting	unnecessary
boundaries	between	knowledge	areas,	boundaries	that	prohibit	the	sorts	of	cross-
contextual	thinking	that	NPs	relish.	From	the	Ne	perspective,	Ni	can	seem	overly
narrow,	rigid,	or	closed.	NPs	may	therefore	contend	that	NJs	(as	well	as	SJs)
should	be	more	open	to	alternative	perspectives.	In	short,	they	criticize	NJs	for
their	lack	of	Ne.
At	the	same	time,	NPs	can	envy	NJs’	ability	to	perceive	deeply.	Rather	than
constantly	bouncing	from	one	topic	to	the	next,	NJs	can	incisively	penetrate	ever
more	deeply	into	a	given	topic	or	problem.	NJs	might	fall	into	an
extemporaneous,	30-minute	lecture	on	a	topic	that	NPs	might	have	abandoned
after	30	seconds.	While	there	may	be	times	when	NPs	are	uninterested	in
entertaining	NJ	monologues,	they	can	nonetheless	appreciate	NJs’	capacity	for
going	deep	rather	than	wide.	NPs	may	also	covet	the	sense	of	conviction	and
certainty	associated	with	Ni,	wishing	they	too	could	experience	a	deep	sense	of
“knowing.”
Ne	&	the	Brain
According	to	Dario	Nardi,	Ne	is	characterized	by	a	“Christmas	tree”	brain-wave
pattern.	Unlike	the	more	synchronized,	zen-like	state	of	Ni,	the	Christmas	tree
pattern	is	asynchronous,	involving	seemingly	random	activation	of	various	brain
regions.	This	random	patterning	is	the	neural	correlate	of	NPs’	propensity	for
horizontal	and	divergent	modes	of	thought.	When	making	creative	or	random
associations,	NPs	are	connecting	information	from	diverse	regions	of	the	brain.
The	active	and	sweeping	nature	of	Ne	may	also	be	glimpsed	in	NPs’	eye
movements.	When	engaging	their	Ne,	their	eyes	tend	to	dart	broadly	in	a	side-to-
side	fashion.	Since	the	head	often	follows	the	path	of	the	eyes,	some	NPs	may
also	display	frequent	head	turning.	Whether	moving	the	head,	the	eyes,	or	both,
these	movements	can	give	the	impression	that	NPs	are	searching	for	something
in	their	surroundings.	What	they	are	actually	seeking,	however,	is	typically	more
abstract—new	connections,	patterns,	words,	ideas,	possibilities,	etc.
10.	Introverted	Sensing	(Si)
Primary	roles:	To	retain,	condense,	and	recollect	information;	to	consult	past
experiences,	routines,	and	traditions;	to	perceive	inner	bodily	sensations
Most	prominent	in:	ISTJs	&	ISFJs;	also	prominent	in	ESTJs	&	ESFJs
Associated	with:	Routines,	habits,	valuing	and	preserving	“the	tried	and	true,”
material	conservativism,	high	regard	for	traditions	and	authority
Famous	ISJs:	Dick	Cheney,	Martin	Luther,	Mother	Theresa,	George	H.W.	Bush
When	thinking	about	sensing,	we	typically	think	in	terms	of	the	five	senses.	But
the	five	senses	really	pertain	more	to	Se	than	Si.	While	Se	constantly	seeks	out
new	opportunities	for	stimulating	the	senses,	Si	is	more	interested	in	the	routine
and	familiar.	It	is	a	careful	and	conservative	function,	drawing	on	existing
resources,	beliefs,	or	practices	in	lieu	of	exploring	or	developing	new	ones.
Most	people	are	familiar	with	the	notion	of	“learning	through	experience.”	This
can	be	associated	with	Si,	which	guides	and	informs	our	behavior	by	consulting
past	experiences.	To	be	sure,	all	types	rely	on	memory	and	past	experience	to
some	extent,	but	for	Si	types	(i.e.,	SJs)	the	past	is	granted	higher	priority	and
greater	authority.
SJ	clergy	and	news	pundits,	for	instance,	are	constantly	making	arguments	from
history,	viewing	the	past	as	the	ultimate	guide	to,	and	authority	for,	present
action.	An	Si	minister	may	emphasize	the	deep	importance	of	preserving	and
continuing	in	the	traditions	of	the	church,	while	SJ	news	pundits	reference	iconic
individuals,	documents,	or	periods	of	history	(e.g.,	the	“founding	fathers,”	the
Constitution,	Lincoln,	etc.)	they	feel	should	be	emulated.	Non-SJ	types,	by
contrast,	may	wonder	why	we	should	grant	the	past	such	a	high	degree	of
authority.	How,	after	all,	are	we	to	determine	which	historical	authorities	are	to
be	followed	and	emulated?	How	do	we	know	whether	to	believe	the	Bible	or	the
Koran,	Jesus	or	Mohammed?	Is	the	decision	merely	arbitrary	or	should	other
evaluative	criteria	be	admitted?
SJs	are	famous	for	embracing	and	defending	“the	tried	and	true.”	They	are
reluctant	to	change	things	they	see	as	having	a	proven	track	record.	“If	it	ain’t
broke,	don’t	fix	it!”	is	another	Si	mantra.
Growing	attached	to	the	routine,	familiar,	and	expected,	repetition	seems	to	play
a	prominent	role	in	Si.	The	more	times	SJs	repeat	something—eat	a	certain	meal,
listen	to	a	specific	song,	etc.—the	more	likeable	(or	tolerable)	it	becomes.	It	was
probably	an	SJ	who,	in	noticing	how	his	tastes	shifted	with	repeated	exposures,
coined	the	phrase	“it	will	grow	on	me.”	In	many	cases,	if	you	can	get	an	SJ	to
repeatedly	try	something,	there’s	a	decent	chance	they	will	eventually	come	to
enjoy	or	at	least	better	tolerate	it.
In	keeping	with	Si’s	appetite	for	consistency,	SJs	tend	to	fall	into	“daily
routines,”	including	routinized	meal	times	and	meal	choices.	My	ISTJ	mother	is
about	as	extreme	as	one	can	get	in	this	respect.	Despite	having	no	history	of	food
allergies	or	gastrointestinal	problems,	she	dislikes	most	foods,	including	most
fruits	and	vegetables.	She	eats	nearly	the	same	thing	every	day,	even	to	the	point
of	counting	the	number	of	tortilla	chips	that	will	flank	her	ham	sandwich.	When
away	from	home,	she	typically	lunchpails	her	meals,	allowing	her	to	continue	to
delight	in	her	hopelessly	bland	and	homogenous	dietary	regimen	(I	love	you
mom!).
Frugality	is	also	commonplace	among	ISJs.	Since	Si	is	focused	on	conserving
and	making	do	with	existing	resources,	ISJs	naturally	gravitate	toward	saving
over	spending.	Of	all	types,	they	are	the	most	likely	to	clip,	organize,	and
redeem	coupons,	justifying	their	fastidiousness	with	phrases	like	“it	all	adds	up.”
Relatedly,	some	ISJs	may	earn	recognition	as	“hoarders,”	refusing	to	part	ways
with	anything	on	account	of	its	perceived	sentimental	or	practical	value.
SJs	also	take	a	conservative	approach	to	their	beliefs	and	worldview.	As	adults,
they	often	persist	in	the	beliefs,	precepts,	and	traditions	of	their	childhood.	They
are	less	disposed	than	other	types	to	question	the	foundational	tenets	on	which
they	were	raised.	However,	as	introverts,	ISJs	seem	somewhat	less	inclined	to
function	as	frontline	activists	for	their	beliefs,	preferring	instead	to	spend	time
reflecting	on	the	past	and	their	cherished	traditions.	Many	enjoy	attending
religious	services	or	studying	religious	texts,	activities	that	further	reinforce	their
Si	beliefs.
Dotting	i’s	&	Crossing	t’s
ISJs,	in	particular,	take	pride	in	“doing	their	duty,”	being	obedient,	and	carrying
out	their	responsibilities.	Unlike	other	types,	they	are	not	opposed	to	receiving	or
following	orders,	especially	from	authorities	they	trust	and	respect.	Many	prefer
work	that	involves	following	a	set	of	pre-established	rules,	guidelines,	or
principles.	They	like	order,	structure,	and	predictability,	all	of	which	imbue	their
lives	with	a	sense	of	safety	and	stability.
ISJs	take	their	responsibilities	seriously,	down	to	the	last	detail.	Indeed,	their
scrupulousness,	or	what	some	might	pejoratively	call	“anal-retentiveness,”	may
at	times	drive	their	non-SJ	family	members	or	co-workers	crazy.	In	the
workplace,	ISJs	may	unwittingly	irritate	others	with	their	tendency	to	ask	litanies
of	questions	to	clarify	exactly	how	things	should	be	done.	This	can	be	frustrating
to	other	types,	especially	P	types,	who	prefer	to	leave	things	as	vague	and	open
as	possible	to	preserve	plenty	of	space	for	individual	autonomy.	So	when	ISJs
keep	pressing	for	more	specifics	and	details,	they	may	worry	that	this	may	lead
to	additional	rules	and	policies	that	may	further	limit	their	freedom.	Of	course,	P
types	need	to	understand	that	such	ISJs	are	simply	being	themselves.	Not	only
that,	but	every	workplace	needs	ISJs	to	handle	the	routine	and	detailed	tasks	that
no	one	else	wants	to	do.	ISJs	make	the	most	consistent	and	reliable	employees.
They	work	slowly	and	steadily	until	the	job	is	done,	meticulously	attending	to	all
the	details	along	the	way.
Outside	the	workplace,	ISJs	are	far	more	easygoing	than	they	are	often	given
credit	for.	Since	Si	is	a	perceiving	function,	ISJs	are	actually	drawn	more	to
perceiving	activities	than	controlling	ones.	Many	ISJs	enjoy	engaging	with
children,	playing	word	games,	working	crossword	puzzles,	crocheting	or
knitting,	reading,	singing,	or	playing	an	instrument.	While	ESJs	may	be	a	bit	less
scrupulous	than	ISJs,	they	tend	to	have	more	trouble	relaxing	and	being
leisurely.
Si	&	the	“Inner	Body”
Of	all	the	functions,	Te	is	decidedly	the	most	“left-brained.”	It	is	logical,	orderly,
precise,	and	controlling.	And	while	Si	also	entails	certain	left-brained	features,
such	as	attending	to	explicit	rules,	procedures,	and	details,	it	also	has	right-
brained	capacities	that	often	go	overlooked.	Among	these	is	the	role	of	Si	in
attending	to	inner	body	sensations	(e.g.,	pain,	hunger,	thirst,	numbness,	tingling,
muscle	tension),	the	body	as	felt	and	experienced	from	within.
When	perceiving	bodily	sensations	more	globally,	Si	provides	access	to	the
simple	yet	sublime	experience	of	embodiment,	of	“bodily	being,”	apart	from
thought	or	outward	stimuli.	Historically,	Eastern	philosophical	and	religious
traditions	have	done	a	far	better	job	exploring	and	cultivating	this	sense	of	inner
being	than	those	of	the	West.	Sensitivity	to	and	awareness	of	bodily	being	can	be
developed	through	activities	requiring	close	attention	to	one’s	inner	body,	such
as	yoga,	Tai-Chi,	Feldenkrais,	meditation,	various	relaxation	techniques,	and	so
on.	Masters	of	inner	bodily	awareness	report	a	deep	sense	of	bodily	knowing	and
bodily	wisdom.	They	learn	what	it	means	to	trust	and	“listen	to	the	body,”
allowing	it	to	instinctively	reveal	the	path	to	health	and	healing.	In	this	sense,	Si
resembles	the	inner	knowing	of	Ni,	only	that	Si	delivers	physical	insights	and	Ni
metaphysical	ones.
With	that	said,	it	seems	that	NPs	(who	also	use	Si)	are	more	inclined	to	explore
this	dimension	of	Si	than	SJs	are,	at	least	in	Western	cultures.	This	may	be	due	to
the	fact	that,	in	the	West,	mind-body	practices	have	yet	to	be	fully	embraced	by
mainstream	culture.	Consequently,	SJs	typically	fail	to	receive	the	number	of
exposures	required	for	these	practices	to	“grow	on	them”	and	to	thereby	earn	a
place	in	their	daily	lives.
Si	&	Imagery
Another	of	Si’s	more	right-brained	capacities	involves	conjuring	or	recalling
inner	images.	As	with	other	types,	some	ISJs	think	more	in	images	than	they	do
in	words.	Those	who	think	in	terms	of	mechanical	images	(more	commonly
ISTJs)	may	be	drawn	to	fields	like	science	or	engineering.	Those	who	process
images	more	holistically	(more	commonly	ISFJs),	such	as	envisioning	faces	or
scenery,	may	show	some	measure	of	artistic	interest	or	aptitude.
While	individuals	of	any	type	may	process	information	visually,	SJs	can	be
distinguished	by	their	attention	to	past	information.	Many	SJs,	for	instance,	can
impressively	recall	dates,	birthdays,	phone	numbers,	street	names	and	locations,
etc.	While	we	often	think	of	dates	and	numbers	as	being	less	visual	than	faces	or
scenery,	SJs	may	use	a	“photographic”	sort	of	memory	to	“see”	dates,	numbers,
etc.
With	that	said,	one	needn’t	possess	a	stellar	memory	to	be	an	ISJ.	Some	ISJs
sport	rather	average	memories,	especially	for	certain	types	of	information.	Some
may	be	better	at	recalling	faces,	while	others	may	excel	at	numeric	recall.	But
considering	the	amount	of	time	ISJs	spend	referencing	and	reflecting	on	the	past,
we	would	certainly	expect	a	strong	memory	to	add	greater	depth,	richness,	and
quality	to	their	lives.
The	Si-Ne	Function	Pair
Si	and	Ne	always	occur	together	in	SJ	and	NP	types,	constituting	the	Si-Ne
“function	pair.”	Of	course,	these	functions	differ	in	their	respective	ordering	in
the	functional	stack,	with	Si	being	higher	and	more	conscious	for	SJs	and	Ne
being	the	more	prominent	function	for	NPs.
In	combining	material	conservativism	(Si)	and	mental	creativity	(Ne),	the	Si-Ne
function	pair	brings	an	appetite	for	resourcefulness	and	craftiness.	Like	NPs,
when	SJs	need	something,	they	enjoy	using	Ne	to	cleverly	fashion	it	from
existing	resources	(Si)	rather	than	purchasing	something	new	(Se).	Regular
patrons	of	thrift	shops	and	craft	stores,	SJs	strive	to	marry	Ne	ingenuity	with	Si
minimalism.	Their	penchant	for	acting	resourcefully	helps	explain	their	relative
indifference	to	current	fashions.	Even	fashion-minded	ISJs	take	more	of	an	Ne
hodge-podge	approach	than	one	of	Se	trendiness.
The	Si-Ne	function	pair	also	involves	a	tension	between	traditionalism	(Si)	and
unconventionalism	(Ne).	In	SJ	types,	Si	traditionalism	typically	gains	the	upper
hand,	involving	careful	adherence	to	existing	traditions,	worldviews,	and
methods.	They	are	more	concerned	with	ensuring	their	beliefs	and	behaviors
align	with	an	existing	standard	(Si)	than	with	formulating	their	own	unique
approach	(Ne).	Because	Si	is	less	conscious	and	falls	lower	in	the	functional
stack	for	NP	types,	it	is	typically	less	influential.	Healthy	NPs	openly	explore	a
broad	array	of	ideas	and	lifestyles,	both	conventional	and	unconventional.
Unlike	ISJs,	it	is	not	uncommon	for	NPs	to	forsake	or	significantly	revise	their
childhood	traditions	and	worldview.
Lastly,	the	Ne-Si	function	pair	entails	a	temporal	element,	with	Si	attuning	to	the
past	and	Ne	to	future	possibilities.	While	we	could	certainly	argue	it	less	natural
and	less	healthy	for	ENPs	to	devote	their	time	and	energy	to	exploring	the	past,
many	follow	in	the	footsteps	of	ISJs	and	develop	strong	interests	in	history.
Doing	so	can	feel	deeply	meaningful	to	ENPs	and	ISJs	alike,	engendering	a
sense	of	union	between	their	beliefs	(Ne)	and	past	actualities	(Si).	This	seems
particularly	common	among	those	interested	in	religion	or	politics,	who	seek	to
root	or	reinforce	their	beliefs	in	the	concrete	past.
Si	vs.	Ni
We	can	also	compare	and	contrast	Si	with	its	intuitive	cousin,	Ni.	As	we	saw	in
Chapter	6,	Si	and	Ni	are	both	convergent	forms	of	perception.	Si	takes	the
entirety	of	an	individual’s	past	and	effectively	condenses	it	into	a	limited	set	of
behavioral	preferences.	This	synoptic	past	serves	as	a	blueprint	for	informing
present	and	future	behavior.
Ni	also	functions	convergently,	synthesizing	information	to	produce	insights,
impressions,	and	explanations.	While	Ni	is	more	concerned	with	perceiving
abstract	truths	than	it	is	with	enacting	them,	INJs	may	nonetheless	display
certain	behavioral	tendencies	that	are	common	to	J	types.	For	instance,	they
generally	prefer	a	certain	measure	of	structure	and	stability	in	their	lifestyle	and
living	arrangements.	Unlike	NP	types,	they	aren’t	open	to	living	like	vagabonds,
bouncing	from	one	place	to	the	next	without	any	clear	plan	or	purpose.
The	most	noteworthy	Si-Ni	difference	is	that	Si	fails	to	apprehend	a	different
reality	behind	sense	data	in	the	way	that	Ni	does.	Seeing	hidden	patterns	and
discerning	causal	relationships	requires	a	specific	tool	(i.e.,	intuition)	that	SJs
don’t	enjoy	ready	access	to.	This	is	why	ISJs	typically	rely	on	traditions	and
outside	authorities	(e.g.,	pundits,	clergy,	etc.)	for	insights	into	hidden	N	realities.
Similarly,	INJs	may	turn	to	others	to	compensate	for	their	own	shortcomings,
such	as	handling	Si	details	and	particulars.
Si	&	the	Brain
According	to	Dario	Nardi’s	research,	ISJs,	like	INJs,	often	show	strong
activation	in	the	visual	regions	of	the	brain.	From	this	we	might	conclude	that
introverted	perception,	like	extraverted	perception,	commonly	entails	a
pronounced	visual	element.	Nardi	also	reports	that	ISJs	display	a	variety	of	brain
activation	patterns,	depending	on	the	ISJ’s	specialty	area.	In	other	words,	as	ISJs
develop	their	own	set	of	habits	and	interests,	their	brains	respond	by	structuring
themselves	accordingly.
In	structuring	itself	around	repetition	and	redundancy,	the	Si	brain	is	in	many
respects	the	opposite	of	what	we	see	with	P	types.	Because	the	left	side	of	the
brain	is	commonly	associated	with	stability	and	redundancy,	SJs	are	often
conceived	of	as	more	left-brained	(although,	as	we’ve	seen,	Si	does	have	certain
right-brained	features	as	well).	The	P	brain	(not	to	be	confused	with	“pea
brain”),	by	contrast,	reflects	a	state	of	openness	to	new	ideas	(Ne)	or	novel
stimuli	from	the	environment	(Se).	Hence,	P	types	are	often	classified	as	more
right-brained,	since	the	right	hemisphere	is	characteristically	more	fluid	and
open.
11.	Extraverted	Sensing	(Se)
Primary	roles:	To	perceive	and	mediate	prompt	responses	to	external	details
and	events;	to	seek	a	breadth	of	novel	sensory	experiences;	to	physically	interact
with	the	world
Most	prominent	in:	ESTPs	&	ESFPs;	also	prominent	in	ISTPs	&	ISFPs
Associated	with:	Sensation-seeking,	kinesthetic	intelligence,	an	“eye	for	detail,”
attunement	to	style	and	appearances,	hands-on	activities,	effortless	performance
Famous	ESPs:	George	W.	Bush,	Lebron	James,	Beyoncé,	Shakira,	Donald
Trump
Se	serves	as	the	dominant	function	for	ESPs	and	the	auxiliary	for	ISP	types.	It
perceives	incoming	information	by	way	of	the	five	senses	(i.e.,	sight,	smell,
taste,	sound,	and	touch).
Since	Se	is	an	extraverted	function,	SPs	seek	a	greater	breadth	and	diversity	of
sensory	experiences	than	SJ	types.	They	delight	in	exploring	and	enjoying	the
full	array	of	sensory	and	physical	pleasures	life	has	to	offer.	They	relish	new
tastes,	sights,	and	experiences.	Many	enjoy	cooking	and	sampling	new	drinks
and	cuisines.
SPs	are	also	the	most	active,	“hands-on,”	and	physically	engaged	of	all	types.
When	immersed	in	a	concrete	activity,	they	experience	a	seamless	flow	between
perception	and	action,	between	seeing	and	doing,	between	the	eyes	and	the
hands.	This	is	why	so	many	SPs	enjoy	athletics,	performance	(e.g.,	singing,
dancing,	acting,	etc.),	and	a	variety	of	hands-on	work.
An	Eye	for	Detail
Like	Si,	Se	is	detail-oriented,	but	in	a	different	sort	of	way.	Si	always	keeps	one
eye	on	the	past,	comparing	present	details	to	pre-existing	standards	or
expectations	(e.g.,	“Is	that	a	new	picture	on	the	wall?	I	don’t	recall	seeing	it	there
before.”).	Se,	by	contrast,	is	less	concerned	with	the	way	things	have	or	have	not
changed,	and	more	interested	in	sensory	novelties.	It	attunes	to	details	it
perceives	as	novel,	interesting,	or	otherwise	important.	It	is	constantly	scanning
the	environment	for	noteworthy	sensory	novelties,	appreciating	details	that	other
types	tend	to	gloss	over.
As	a	child,	I	would	occasionally	venture	on	long	car	rides	with	my	ISTP	father.
He	loved	driving	because	it	furnished	him	ample	time	for	both	thinking	(Ti)	and
sightseeing	(Se).	Over	the	course	of	these	excursions,	he	invariably	"spotted"
things	to	bring	to	my	attention:	a	deer	prancing	through	a	distant	field,	a	rare	or
vintage	sports	car,	a	circling	hawk	scoping	out	its	prey.	Only	rarely	did	he	seem
focused	on	the	road	ahead,	preferring	instead	to	scan	the	countryside	for	new	and
noteworthy	sights	to	behold.
Many	SPs	also	display	impressive	powers	of	visual	recall.	While	they	may	or
may	not	display	an	innate	sense	of	direction,	most	are	good	at	recalling
landmarks.	This	is	due,	at	least	in	part,	to	their	constant	attunement	to	their
surroundings.	Taking	interest	in	the	details	of	what	is	happening	around	them,
they	are	better	at	recalling	contextual	details	than	other	types.
Image	&	Appearance
In	attuning	to	novel	sensory	details,	it	is	only	natural	that	SPs	take	note	of	new
styles	and	fashions.	ESPs,	in	particular,	are	the	most	likely	of	all	types	to	keep
pace	with	current	styles.	They	can’t	help	but	take	notice	of	what	other	people	are
doing,	wearing,	driving,	etc.	They	are	like	mirrors	of	the	material	world.
Whatever	they	perceive	around	them	they	tend	to	reflect	in	their	actions,
possessions,	and	lifestyle.
While	not	all	ESTPs	dress	stylishly,	most	enjoy	sporting	new,	stylish,	or	at	least
well-maintained	vehicles.	ESFPs	are	among	the	most	aesthetically-concerned	of
all	types,	being	highly	attentive	to	their	own	appearance,	as	well	as	that	of	their
surroundings.	This,	combined	with	their	natural	attunement	to	current	styles	and
fashions,	often	renders	them	fashionable	and	physically	attractive.	Their	homes
are	typically	well-manicured	and,	budget	permitting,	embellished	with	all	the
latest	accoutrements.
In	light	of	the	above,	ESPs	are	commonly	criticized	for	being	shallow	and
“superficial.”	The	stone	throwers,	in	this	case,	are	typically	introverts	(often
INs).	Despite	the	fact	that	all	extraverts,	not	to	mention	all	the	extraverted
functions,	are	in	a	certain	sense	superficial,	Se	seems	to	be	one	of	the	easiest	and
most	preferred	targets	of	the	introverted	critique.	More	specifically,	ESPs	are
often	accused	of	being	too	consumed	with	things	like	image,	status,	appearances,
and	material	goods.
The	Se-Ni	Function	Pair
Se	and	Ni	always	occur	together	in	SP	and	NJ	types,	constituting	the	Se-Ni
function	pair.	For	ESPs,	Se	is	dominant	and	highly	conscious,	with	Ni	being
inferior	and	mostly	unconscious.	The	reverse	is	true	for	INJs,	for	whom	Ni	is
more	conscious	and	Se	less	conscious.
These	inverse	functional	configurations	lead	INJs	and	ESPs	to	experience	the
world	in	dramatically	different	ways.	INJs’	typical	mode	of	experiencing	the
world	is	impressionistic.	They	are	less	inclined	to	notice	or	zero-in	on	concrete
details.	They	are	oblivious	to	details	ESPs	would	readily	register.	Instead	of
consciously	attending	to	sensory	details,	INJs’	Se	collects	them	unconsciously
and	uses	them	as	raw	materials	for	discerning	what	is	happening	beneath	the
surface	of	things	(Ni).	So	rather	than	noticing	the	details	of	an	individual’s
appearance,	for	instance,	an	INJ	might	be	impressed	by	the	degree	to	which	she
seems	genuine	in	her	presentation.
While	Se	attends	to	the	appearance	of	things,	Ni	is	concerned	with	their	deeper
qualities	and	substantiveness.	ESPs	are	constantly	acquiring	new	goods,	even	if
of	lower	quality,	to	keep	things	interesting	and	trendy.	And	while	INJs	are	to
some	extent	concerned	with	appearances	(they	too	have	Se),	they	are	more
attuned	to	the	quality	and	craftsmanship	of	things.	They	are	less	concerned	about
being	trendy	than	ensuring	things	are	substantive,	thoughtfully-crafted,	and
otherwise	amenable	to	their	Ni	tastes.	NFJs,	in	particular,	often	exhibit	the	most
refined	(or	what	other	types	may	deem	expensive	or	pretentious)	tastes	of	all
types.	The	popular	television	comedy,	Frasier,	is	a	great	example.	Much	of	the
show’s	humor	revolves	around	the	sophisticated	snobbiness	of	Frasier	(ENFJ)
and	his	brother	Niles	(INFJ).	This	includes	flaunting	linguistic	formalisms	and	a
high-brow	vocabulary,	as	well	as	frequent	allusions	to	fine	dining,	orchestral
music,	designer	clothing,	and	the	like.
The	Ni	concern	for	quality	and	substance	may	at	times	be	mistaken	for	Se	image
consciousness.	For	instance,	if	an	INTJ	were	to	purchase	an	expensive	vehicle,
such	as	a	Mercedes	Benz,	some	types	may	view	this	as	an	attempt	to	gain	Se
style	points.	But	the	reasons	behind	the	INTJ’s	decision	may	actually	have	more
to	do	with	quality	design	and	engineering	(Ni)	than	with	looking	trendy	or
stylish	(Se).	I	have	also	seen	SPs	invoke	similar	Ni	justifications	in	hopes	of
preempting	critiques	of	their	own	high-dollar	purchases.
Se	vs.	Ne
Se	and	Ne	share	certain	similarities.	As	extraverted	perceiving	functions,	both
seek	stimulation	from,	and	engagement	with,	the	outside	world.	Both	work
broadly	rather	than	narrowly,	casting	their	nets	widely	so	as	to	maximize	their
opportunity	for	diversity	and	novelty.	There	is	of	course	a	rather	important
distinction	between	Se	and	Ne,	namely,	the	S-N	difference.	Se	deals	in	the	realm
of	the	observable	and	tangible,	while	Ne	concerns	itself	with	more	abstract,
ideational	matters.
Moreover,	Se	can	be	associated,	at	least	to	some	extent,	with	conventional
lifestyles	and	appearances,	while	Ne	often	ventures	off	the	beaten	path.	ESPs
tend	to	reflect	the	material	trends	around	them,	mirroring	and	mimicking
whatever	is	in	vogue.	While	ENPs	may	be	aware	of	current	trends	and	fashions,
they	are	more	apt	to	put	their	own	unique	spin	on	things.	They	are	more
concerned	with	dressing	creatively	than	with	appearing	Se	trendy.	ENPs	also
show	greater	openness	to	unconventional	living	arrangements,	with	many	being
critical	of	the	Se	“bourgeois	lifestyle.”
ENPs	are	also	more	flighty,	oblivious,	and	absent-minded	than	ESPs.	Getting
lost	in	their	own	thoughts	and	musings,	they	can	appear	to	have	“their	head	in
the	clouds.”	ENPs	may	also	present	as	teeming	with	enthusiasm,	especially
when	their	Ne	is	in	full	throttle.	While	ESPs	are	less	apt	to	appear	lost	in	or
overly	enthusiastic	about	their	thoughts,	they	often	show	signs	of	physical
restlessness,	such	as	fidgeting,	foot-tapping,	looking	around,	pacing,	and	so	on.
This	is	why	both	ESPs	and	ENPs	can	both	be	prone	to	attention-deficit
diagnoses.	ESPs	are	more	apt	to	be	diagnosed	with	ADHD	(attention-deficit
hyperactivity	disorder),	while	ENPs	seem	disposed	to	ADD	(attention-deficit
disorder).	In	my	view,	it	is	not	that	EPs	lack	attention	per	se,	but	merely	require
higher	levels	or	certain	types	of	stimulation	to	fully	capture	their	attention.
Se	vs.	Si
Se	and	Si	are	similar	in	their	concern	for	details	and	concrete	matters.	While	Se
attends	to	environmental	details,	Si	is	concerned	with	recalling	or	reconciling
past	details	with	those	of	the	present.	Se	gathers	concrete	information	broadly,
seeking	diversity	and	novelty.	Si	perceives	more	narrowly,	drawing	on	past
experiences,	especially	those	which	have	become	routinized	or	otherwise	deeply
engrained.
The	sensing	functions	can	also	be	associated	with	lifestyle	preferences—food,
housing,	material	goods,	spending	habits,	and	so	on.	As	we’ve	seen,	types	using
Si	(NPs	and	SJs)	tend	to	be	more	conservative	in	their	approach	to	material
goods.	They	pride	themselves	in	creatively	recycling	and	reusing	material
resources	whenever	possible.
Types	using	Se	(SPs	and	NJs)	are	more	liberal	in	their	expenditures.	Remember,
Se	is	concerned	with	securing	a	breadth	of	sensory	experiences.	And	one	surefire
way	of	doing	so	is	purchasing	material	goods	or	novel	experiences	(e.g.,
vacations,	dining	out,	etc.).
Se	types	are	also	more	concerned	with	physical	appearances,	which	often
translates	into	time	spent	improving	or	stylizing	their	own	appearance	or
possessions.	Female	SPs	and	NJs,	for	instance,	seem	more	inclined	to	spend	time
applying	make-up	than	SJ	or	NP	females.	Geographically	speaking,	Los	Angeles
and	Beverly	Hills	are	apt	examples	of	the	Se-Ni	lifestyle,	while	northwestern
cities	such	as	San	Francisco,	Portland,	and	Seattle	are	characteristically	Ne-Si.
With	that	said,	Se-Si	differences	may	be	less	overt	in	ESJs	and	ISPs,	since	their
dominant	E-I	attitude	may	serve	to	moderate	their	Si	or	Se	auxiliary.
Conditioning	and	circumstances	can	also	have	a	moderating	effect.	I	have
known,	for	instance,	ISPs	who	by	many	standards	would	qualify	as	“savers,”	as
well	as	ESJs	who	would	qualify	as	“spenders.”	With	that	said,	if	we	zoom	out
and	look	at	the	general	patterns,	Si-Se	differences	still	hold	in	ESJs	and	ISPs,
even	if	less	consistent	or	obvious	than	what	we	see	in	ESPs	and	ISJs.
Se	&	the	Brain
According	to	Dario	Nardi,	SPs	exhibit	what	he	calls	a	“tennis-hop”	brain	pattern.
In	using	the	term	“tennis-hop,”	he	is	referencing	a	common	practice	among
tennis	players,	involving	a	side-to-side	hopping	motion	as	they	await	a	serve	or
returned	ball	from	their	opponent.	Nardi	suggests	that	SPs’	brain	activity
assumes	this	sort	of	pattern	as	they	await	new	stimuli	from	the	environment.	The
tennis-hop	pattern	is	asymmetrical	and	oscillating,	which	Nardi	believes	primes
them	for	quick	sensorimotor	responses.	He	reports	that	all	personality	types
display	this	pattern	during	certain	activities,	such	as	while	playing	video	games
requiring	quick	hand-eye	responses.
You	may	recall	that	the	“Christmas	tree”	pattern,	characteristic	of	the	Ne	brain,
was	also	asymmetrical.	The	asymmetric	activity	displayed	in	both	Se	and	Ne
brain	states	seems	consistent	with	the	random,	impulsive,	and	unpredictable
ways	of	P	types.	It	seems	that	Mother	Nature	has	wired	P	types	(especially	EPs)
to	await	or	seek	new	ideas,	experiences,	or	possibilities	to	which	they	can	readily
respond	and	adapt.
12.	Introverted	Thinking	(Ti)
Primary	role:	To	examine	practical	or	conceptual	issues	using	deep,	implicit,
and	nuanced	logic;	to	develop	and	refine	subjective	methods,	strategies,	or
concepts
Most	prominent	in:	INTPs	&	ISTPs.	Also	prominent	in	ENTPs	&	ESTPs
Associated	with:	Deep	skepticism,	tacit	logic,	self-regulation	and	self-
optimization,	personal	independence	and	autonomy
Famous	ITPs:	Einstein,	Bill	Gates,	Henri	Bergson,	Robert	Pirsig,	Robert
Nozick,	Ken	Wilber,	Lance	Armstrong
ITPs	use	Ti	as	their	dominant	function,	while	ETPs	use	it	as	their	auxiliary.	Ti
applies	deep	logic	and	nuanced	reasoning	to	understand	practical	or	conceptual
issues.	Unlike	the	more	standardized	and	systematic	ways	of	Te,	Ti	has	more	of
an	intuitive,	right-brained	flavor.	While	it	can	certainly	be	applied	to	more
formal	or	structured	problems,	such	as	mathematical	proofs	or	philosophical
syllogisms,	it	is	more	of	a	free-wheeling	sort	of	logic	that	is	typically	applied
informally.
According	to	Dario	Nardi,	one	of	the	roles	of	Ti	is	integrating	visual	and
kinesthetic	data.	More	specifically,	Nardi	associates	it	with	“object	identification
and	motor	skills,	such	as	aim…it	helps	us	determine	where	we	end	and	the	rest
of	the	world	begins.”	Along	similar	lines,	Lenore	Thomson,	in	her	book,
Personality	Type	,	suggests	that	Ti	predominates	in	activities	like	aligning	and
hammering	a	nail.	In	determining	where	and	how	hard	to	strike	the	nail,	Ti	uses
a	technique	commonly	known	as	“eyeballing.”	It	informally	assesses	the
situation	(e.g.,	the	size	of	the	hammer,	length	of	the	nail,	thickness	of	the	board)
and	proceeds	to	make	judgments	and	adjustments	for	each	successive	strike	of
the	nail.	Through	this	sort	of	informal	reasoning,	TPs	develop	their	own	unique
methods	and	techniques,	many	of	which	may	significantly	differ	from	those	of
other	TPs.	This	is	why	Ti	methods	are	often	described	as	“subjective.”	Unlike	Te
methods,	they	are	not	standardized	or	collectively	determined.
Subjective	Methods	&	Strategies
TPs	enjoy	developing	and	refining	their	own	methods	and	techniques.	Such
techniques	may	be	characteristically	N	(e.g.,	writing,	philosophizing)	or	S	(e.g.,
athletic	skills,	mechanical	/	technical	skills,	etc.)	in	nature.	Unlike	ISJs,	ITPs
despise	working	in	a	cookie-cutter,	step-by-step	fashion.	Eschewing	instruction
manuals	and	“how-to”	guides	whenever	possible,	they	prefer	to	use	their	own
methods	and	powers	of	reasoning	to	figure	things	out.
A	great	example	of	Ti	working	in	tandem	with	both	S	and	N	can	be	found	in
Robert	Pirsig’s	classic	philosophical	novel,	Zen	and	the	Art	of	Motorcycle
Maintenance	.	Written	from	the	first-person	perspective,	the	ITP	narrator
recounts	his	thoughts	and	experiences	over	the	course	of	a	cross-country
motorcycle	trip,	a	trip	whose	express	purpose	involved	achieving	philosophical
and	existential	clarity.	One	of	the	beautiful	things	about	the	book	is	Pirsig’s
ability	to	interweave	S	and	N	elements.	As	intimated	by	the	book’s	title,	his
experiences	with	motorcycle	repair	(S)	illustrate	and	inform	his	philosophical
insights	(N).	While	Pirsig’s	musings	are	certainly	interesting	from	a
philosophical	perspective,	they	also	constitute	a	lucid	and	accessible	first-hand
look	at	Ti	in	action.	Pirsig’s	thought	processes,	as	well	as	his	descriptions	of	how
to	properly	maintain	a	motorcycle,	wonderfully	portray	the	subjective	methods
of	Ti,	not	to	mention	its	philosophical	propensities.	Interestingly,	Pirsig’s
philosophy	and	his	method	of	motorcycle	maintenance	dovetail	in	a	concept	he
calls	“quality.”	He	suggests	the	notion	of	quality	cannot	be	fully	captured	in
words,	which	is	unsurprising	in	light	of	what	we	know	about	Ti’s	status	as	a
more	tacit	form	of	reasoning.
In	addition	to	formulating	its	own	subjective	methods,	Ti	also	develops	and
refines	its	own	strategies.	It	is	constantly	making	calculations	based	on
numerous	variables	(again,	typically	informally)	in	order	to	maximize	efficiency
and	achieve	its	objectives.	For	example,	an	ITP	concerned	with	maximizing	fuel
economy	might	use	Ti	to	calibrate	his	speed	and	minimize	brake	usage	while
driving	(i.e.,	“hypermiling”).	Or,	he	may	consider	clever	ways	of	consolidating
trips	or	tasks	to	maximize	efficiency.	Such	strategies	are	rarely	explicated	in	a
way	that	a	business	plan	might	be.	Explicit	and	carefully	delineated	strategies
are	more	consistent	with	Te	methodology.	Ti	strategies	are	more	impromptu	and
makeshift,	allowing	for	fluid	calibration	to	the	situation	at	hand.	A	Ti	hunter,	for
instance,	might	constantly	adjust	his	strategy	in	response	to	ever	changing
circumstances.	The	same	could	be	said	for	Ti	athletes	over	the	course	of	an
athletic	contest.
Deep	Skepticism	&	Reductive	Thinking
ITPs	are	constantly	examining	their	own	thoughts	to	scrutinize	their	logic	and
better	understand	their	origins.	They	consider	it	unacceptable	to	construct	a
theory	on	a	dubious	conceptual	platform.	Their	insistence	on	developing	a	pure
and	logical	foundation	makes	them	less	confident	than	J	types	about	what	can	be
considered	“fact”	or	“knowledge.”	Indeed,	many	TPs,	especially	NTPs,	are
unsure	we	can	know	much	of	anything	with	full	confidence.	Many	of	the	ancient
“sophists”	may	well	have	been	NTPs,	not	to	mention	a	hefty	chunk	of
contemporary	“postmodernists.”	Robert	Pirsig,	who	we	discussed	above,	found
much	to	like	in	the	ancient	sophists.
Ti	can	readily	identify	inconsistencies	or	logical	shortcomings	in	nearly	any	line
of	reasoning.	TPs	find	it	easier	to	identify	inconsistencies	or	logical
shortcomings—to	assert	what	isn’t	true—than	to	confidently	assert	what	is.	Due
to	Ti’s	acute	sensitivity	to	logical	inconsistencies,	TPs	can	be	quick	(sometimes
too	quick)	to	dismiss	entire	theories,	throwing	out	the	proverbial	baby	with	the
bathwater.	J	types,	by	contrast,	seem	less	deterred	by	ostensible	inconsistencies,
perhaps	figuring	they	will	eventually	be	explained	or	reconciled.
When	it	comes	to	building	a	system	of	knowledge,	Ti’s	first	priority	is	to	identify
and	clarify	the	lowest	common	denominator.	It	works	to	strip	away	all	“non-
essentials.”	It	then	proceeds	to	represent	and	describe	what	is	essential	by	way	of
concepts.	NTPs,	in	particular,	derive	great	joy	from	playing	with	concepts.	They
love	developing,	refining,	and	scrutinizing	them.	They	may	even	utilize	charts
and	diagrams	in	hopes	of	maximizing	the	coherency,	consistency,	and	structure
of	their	concepts	and	frameworks.	Their	thirst	for	foundational	knowledge	in	the
form	of	concepts	contributes	to	their	penchant	for	philosophy	and
philosophizing.
Although	NJs	and	NFPs	also	feel	at	home	with	concepts,	they	are	typically	not
as	enamored	with	them	as	NTPs	seem	to	be.	NTJs,	for	instance,	seem	concerned
with	describing	and	understanding	systems	than	with	exploring	and	refining	the
concepts	themselves.	For	INTJs,	concepts	are	important	insofar	as	they
contribute	to	a	better	understanding	of	the	system.	For	NTPs,	however,	the
concepts	themselves	are	celebrated	as	forums	for	employing	Ti	logic	and
exploring	Ne	associations.	The	personality	preferences	and	functions	described
in	this	book	are	examples	of	the	sorts	of	concepts	NTPs	enjoy	wrestling	with.
Control,	Freedom,	&	Autonomy
Because	Ti	is	an	introverted	judging	function,	ITPs	can	in	many	respects	be
considered	“inner	control	freaks.”	Even	if	seeing	themselves	as	outwardly
adaptable	or	easygoing,	their	need	to	be	in	control	of	themselves	is	most
apparent	when	others	try	to	instruct,	manage,	or	in	any	way	coerce	them.	When
ITPs	sense	that	others	are	trying	to	control	them,	they	instinctively	resist	or
retract.	There	may	be	nothing	they	despise	more	than	being	controlled	from
without.
In	light	of	their	thirst	for	self-control,	ITPs	are	highly	concerned	with
maximizing	their	freedom	and	autonomy;	they	are	the	most	fiercely	independent
of	all	types.	They	want	to	do	things	their	own	way	and	in	their	own	time.	They
resist,	even	if	only	inwardly,	any	actual	or	perceived	threat	to	their	autonomy.
For	similar	reasons,	they	may	gravitate	toward	anarchist	or	libertarian	political
philosophies.
These	same	dynamics	animate	ITPs’	religious	preferences.	Namely,	their	first
inclination	is	to	shuck	all	authority.	For	INTPs	in	particular,	this	often	makes
theism	an	unacceptable	option,	which	is	why	many	INTPs	consider	themselves
atheists	or	agnostics.	It’s	not	that	they	forsake	theism	without	some	objective
reasons	for	doing	so,	but	Ti,	especially	when	combined	with	Ne,	predisposes
ITPs	to	explore	and	embrace	anti-theistic	arguments.	INTPs	can	be	so	hell-bent
on	being	free	and	independent	that	they	don’t	want	to	be	accountable	to	anyone
or	anything,	including	a	god	or	deity.
Nor	are	TPs	(especially	INTPs)	particularly	willing	to	cede	their	independence
in	the	workplace.	Capitulating	to	standardized	policies,	procedures,	and
protocols	(i.e.,	Te	rules)	is	anathema	to	them;	standardization	runs	against	their
grain.	TPs	thrive	on	having	the	freedom	to	develop	and	employ	their	own
approach.	All	of	this	makes	them	reluctant	to	function	as	employees	and	curious
about	entrepreneurship.	Many	ITPs	decide	they	would	rather	pave	their	own	path
and	risk	financial	instability	than	die	a	slow	death	among	organizational	rules
and	bureaucracy.
When	TPs	do	find	themselves	part	of	a	system,	many	can’t	help	but	push	the
envelope	to	see	how	much	freedom	they	can	carve	out	for	themselves,
calculating	ways	of	abnegating	or	circumventing	as	many	Te	responsibilities	as
possible	(this,	again,	is	most	pronounced	in	INTPs).	They	do	this	because	they
are	naturally	repelled	by	external	systems	of	control	(Te),	which	feel	too	far
removed	from	the	more	instinctive	ways	of	Ti.	Just	as	Fe	norms	can	feel
dehumanizing	from	the	perspective	of	Fi	individualism,	excessive	Te	rules	can
be	seen	as	dehumanizing	ITPs	by	stripping	them	of	their	freedom	to	use	their
dominant	function.
TPs’	thirst	for	autonomy	also	carries	huge	implications	for	their	relationships.
This	is	especially	true	for	ITPs,	who	struggle	to	reconcile	their	Ti’s	push	for
complete	independence	with	their	inferior	Fe’s	need	for	social	affiliation	and
affirmation.	Whether	they	are	willing	to	admit	it	or	not,	ITPs	have	a	“need	to	be
needed.”	Deep	down,	most	are	terrified	of	being	alone,	feeling	that	their	sense	of
purpose	and	motivation	will	evaporate	without	someone	else	in	their	lives.	With
that	said,	there	are	times	when	ITPs	feel	so	self-sufficient	and	independent	that
they	convince	themselves	they	don’t	need	other	people.	But	after	droughts	of
human	interaction,	they	invariably	start	to	feel	something	missing	from	their
lives.	This	prompts	them	to	reinitiate	contact	with	others,	at	least	until	they	feel
compelled	to	assert	their	independence	again.
Their	penchant	for	independence	also	influences	ITPs’	approach	to	others’	ideas.
Namely,	they	have	great	difficulty	accepting	much	of	anything	as	true	unless	it
resonates	with	their	own	logic	or	is	confirmed	in	their	own	experience.	They
seem	to	lack	faith	in	anyone’s	logic	but	their	own.	While	open	to	hearing	and
entertaining	others’	perspectives,	when	it	comes	to	making	decisions	about	what
is	or	isn’t	true,	Ti	is	the	ultimate	arbiter.	With	that	said,	ITPs	may	be	more	open
to	accepting	outside	opinions	regarding	certain	F	matters	(e.g.,	what	constitutes
good	art,	music,	style,	etc.),	which	fall	outside	the	purview	of	Ti	logic.
Ti	&	the	Brain
According	to	Dario	Nardi’s	research,	TPs	exhibit	strong	use	of	four	brain	regions
responsible	for	complex	logical	reasoning.	While	other	types	may	show
activation	in	one	or	two	of	these	regions,	TPs	commonly	display	concurrent
activation	in	two	to	four	of	them.	Nardi	suggests	this	allows	TPs	to	effectively:
Linearly	derive	solutions	(left	side	of	brain)
Holistically	work	with	concepts	(right	side)
Integrate	visual-kinesthetic	data	(left	side)
Weigh	pros	and	cons	of	competing	factors	or	options	(right	side)
Nardi’s	findings	also	confirm	ITPs’	reputed	propensity	for	detachment.	Namely,
he	found	that	ITPs	are	adept	at	drowning	out	background	noise	in	order	to
enhance	concentration	and	objectivity.	They	can	focus	and	“get	in	the	zone”
even	in	noisy	or	otherwise	distracting	environments.	This	ability	to	“tune	out	the
world”	allows	them	to	better	focus	on	their	thoughts	and	projects.
Not	only	can	Ti	shut	down	external	noise,	but	also	internal	emotional	noise.
Little	is	more	distracting	or	unsettling	to	TPs	than	experiencing	negative
emotions.	When	negative	emotions	are	running	high,	TPs	lose	their	usual	sense
of	self-control.	This	often	leads	them	to	experiment	with	cognitive,	behavioral,
and	philosophical	techniques	to	preempt	or	mitigate	negative	emotions.
To	learn	more	about	Ti,	be	sure	to	check	out	my	recent	book	on	INTPs.
13.	Extraverted	Thinking	(Te)
Primary	roles:	To	succinctly	express	logic-based	judgments;	to	understand	or
render	systems	and	operations	more	rational,	efficient,	and	effective
Most	prominent	in:	ENTJs	&	ESTJs;	also	prominent	in	INTJs	&	ISTJs
Associated	with:	Explicit	logic,	precise	and	pointed	expressions,	bureaucracy
and	“red	tape,”	quantitative	methods	(“Show	me	the	numbers!”)
Famous	ETJs:	Henry	Ford,	Bill	O’Reily
ETJ	types	use	Extraverted	Thinking	(Te)	as	their	dominant	function,	while	ITJs
employ	it	as	their	auxiliary.	As	an	extraverted	function,	Te	is	readily	identifiable
in	the	presentation	and	expressions	of	TJ	types.	It	is	characteristically
impersonal,	focused	more	on	things	and	systems	than	people	or	feelings.	TJs
readily	express	their	rational	judgments;	they	literally	think	(i.e.,	make	logical
judgments,	conclusions,	and	decisions)	aloud.	Their	direct,	“to	the	point”	style	is
sometimes	perceived	by	others	as	harsh,	blunt,	or	tactless.	Physicians	with	poor
bedside	manner,	such	as	Dr.	House	of	the	acclaimed	television	show	House,	are
notorious	for	their	Te	brusqueness.
TJs	strive	to	make	the	external	world	and	its	operations	more	rational.	Toward
this	end,	they	often	end	up	managing	businesses	or	organizations.	ENTJs,	in
particular,	are	highly	represented	among	CEOs,	with	ESTJs	and	ISTJs	gobbling
up	the	middle-level	management	positions.	While	INTJs	may	also	float	to	the
top	of	organizations,	as	Ni	dominants,	they	typically	prefer	the	role	of	senior
advisor	to	that	of	manager	or	decision-maker.
TJs	may	also	be	drawn	to	various	teaching	and	training	roles.	I	have	personally
encountered	numerous	ISTJ	elementary	school	teachers,	and	research	has	shown
INTJs	to	be	quite	common	among	college	professors.	Generally	speaking,	TJs
enjoy	work	that	allows	them	to	order,	organize,	and	manage	information	or
operations.
In	my	experience,	TJ	males	are	often	more	extreme	in	their	Te	presentation	(i.e.,
more	characteristically	“left-brained”)	than	TJ	females.	This	relates	to	what	we
saw	in	Chapter	5,	namely,	that	males	generally	enjoy	less	balance	and
communication	between	brain	hemispheres.	Hence,	some	of	the	material
presented	in	this	chapter,	designed	to	paint	a	distinct	portrait	of	Te,	may	fail	to
fully	resonate	with	some	TJ	females.
Defining	&	Measuring
Te	approaches	and	structures	things	in	explicitly	rational	ways.	It	may	do	so	for
the	sake	of	understanding	(e.g.,	science),	utility	(e.g.,	technology),	or
maintaining	external	order	(e.g.,	instating	laws	and	rules).	Unlike	Ti,	whose	logic
holistically	consults	both	sides	of	the	brain,	Te	hails	squarely	from	the	left
hemisphere.	The	“left	brain”	is	characteristically	logical,	analytical,	systematic,
and	explicit	in	its	workings.	It	takes	the	perceived	world,	carves	it	up	into	small
pieces,	then	proceeds	to	name	and	analyze	each	piece	on	its	own	terms.
TJs	(especially	NTJs)	view	the	world	as	comprised	of	myriad	systems,	each	of
which	can	be	analyzed	and	explicated	in	terms	of	rational	hierarchies.	The	better
each	system	is	understood	and	rationally	delineated,	the	more	amenable	it
becomes	to	prediction,	control,	and	manipulation.	Since	modern	science	is
founded	on	these	Te	ideals,	it	is	readily	embraced	and	defended	by	TJ	types.
Never	vague	or	ambiguous,	Te	employs	precise	definitions,	policies,	plans,	and
procedures.	It	carefully	spells	out	how	to	get	from	here	to	there,	using	as	many
maps,	labels,	and	directions	as	necessary.	From	the	ETJ	perspective,	nothing	can
be	optimized	unless	we	work	to	objectively	understand	it	and	control	it	with
standard	operating	procedures.	Such	standards	should	always	be	clearly
explicated	to	minimize	ambiguity	and	the	potential	for	interpretative	error.
Quantification	is	another	hallmark	feature	of	the	Te	approach.	This	may	involve
employing	any	number	of	objective	measurements,	benchmarks,	statistics,	and
the	like.	The	increasingly	popular	notion	of	“evidenced-based	practice”	is	a	good
example,	which	in	most	cases	is	synonymous	with	quantitative	research.	For	TJs,
more	than	other	types,	the	“numbers	don’t	lie.”	They	believe	that	formal
quantitative	research	should	serve	as	the	bedrock	of	human	knowledge	and
decision-making.
As	an	example	of	the	Te	proclivity	for	formal	testing,	my	INTJ	friend	is	always
prodding	me	to	implement	“split	testing”	on	various	pages	of	my	blog.
Essentially,	a	split	test	is	like	a	miniature	science	experiment.	It	involves	setting
up	two	nearly	identical	pages	with	only	minor	differences	(e.g.,	a	different	color
or	layout).	Half	of	the	blog	visitors	are	then	directed	to	one	page,	while	the	other
half	is	served	the	alternate	page.	Statistics	are	then	used	to	determine	which
variation	performs	better.
The	Te-Fi	Function	Pair
Te	and	Fi	always	occur	together	in	TJs	and	FPs,	constituting	the	Te-Fi	function
pair.	For	TJs,	Te	is	the	more	conscious	and	Fi	the	less	conscious	function,	while
the	reverse	is	true	for	FP	types.	Although	Te	and	Fi	are	in	some	respects
functional	opposites,	they	are	also	complementary.
Fi,	as	we	will	see	in	the	next	chapter,	evaluates	and	refines	personal	tastes,
feelings,	and	values.	It	champions	individuality,	emphasizing	and	defending	the
unique	qualities	of	the	individual.	It	shows	particular	concern	for	life’s
“underdogs”—children,	animals,	the	elderly,	the	underserved,	and	so	on.
Because	of	the	highly	rational	presentation	of	Te	and	the	introverted	nature	of	Fi,
it	can	be	easy	to	assume	that	TJs	are	devoid	of	emotion.	But	their	outward
presentation	belies	the	fact	that	TJs	can	experience	deep	feelings	and	develop
strong	attachments	via	their	Fi.	Like	IFPs,	some	TJs	are	sensitive	to	instances	of
injustice,	inequity,	and	victimization.	Both	TJs	and	FPs	are	inclined	to	turn	to
legislation	(Te)	for	redressing	perceived	injustices	or	victimization	(Fi).	We	see
this	all	the	time,	for	instance,	when	Fi	tragedies	(e.g.,	school	shootings,	child
abductions)	prompt	the	passing	of	new	laws	or	the	formation	of	new
organizations	(Te)	intended	to	prevent	future	recurrences.
From	this	we	learn	of	the	typological	connection	between	deep	personal	feelings
(Fi)	and	collective	rules	and	policies	(Te).	The	notion	of	a	“fair	and	just”	system
or	workplace	aptly	illustrates	this	Fi-Te	connection.	Science	fiction	is	another
good	example,	exploring	the	effects	of	technology	(Te)	on	individual
experiences	and	values	(Fi).	This,	by	the	way,	is	why	science	fiction	junkies	are
often	TJ	or	FP	types.
Te	vs.	Ti
Compared	to	Te,	Ti	is	a	more	implicit	and	subjective	form	of	logic.	Rather	than
looking	outward	and	referencing	objective	standards,	it	reasons	and	operates
according	to	its	own	inner	criteria.	It	also	spends	ample	time	questioning
underlying	premises	and	assumptions,	desperately	seeking,	but	struggling	to
find,	firm	epistemological	footing.	It	therefore	tends	to	be	more	critical	and
reductive	in	its	workings.
Te,	by	contrast,	is	more	positivistic	and	forward-moving	(especially	in	ETJs),
constantly	proposing	new	facts,	definitions,	policies,	procedures,	and	so	on.
Indeed,	we	see	this	sort	of	expansiveness	with	all	the	extraverted	functions.	The
extraverted	functions	are	constantly	adding	and	broadening,	while	the
introverted	functions	tend	to	reduce	and	deepen.	So	while	Te	goes	about
expanding	the	number	of	T	assertions	in	the	world,	Ti	earns	its	keep	by
scrutinizing,	undercutting,	or	circumventing	them.
One	can	find	this	Te-Ti	tension	in	nearly	any	organization.	Those	on	the	Te	side
are	always	looking	for	ways	to	improve	operations,	which	often	involves
developing	and	implementing	new	policies	and	procedures.	Meanwhile,	those	in
the	Ti	corner	are	pushing	to	keep	things	open-ended	in	the	name	of	individual
autonomy.	We	see	similar	tensions	in	political	discourse,	such	as	debates	over
limited	government	(Ti)	versus	government	expansion	(Te).
Te,	as	we’ve	seen,	also	aligns	itself	with	“the	scientific	method,”	or,	more
broadly,	with	objective	methods.	Some	TJs	(as	well	as	FPs),	put	science	on	a
pedestal,	seeing	it	as	humanity’s	primary	hope	for	ultimate	knowledge	or
salvation.	While	obtaining	knowledge	and	solving	the	problems	of	humanity	are
also	of	interest	to	TPs,	they	prefer	to	approach	these	matters	less	formally	on	the
individual	level.	They	feel	that	individuals	can	discover	truth	and	wisdom
through	their	own	minds,	methods,	and	experiences.	This	of	course	exemplifies
the	age-old	distinction	between	the	scientist	(Te)	and	the	philosopher	(Ti	or	Ni).
Te	&	the	Brain
We’ve	already	discussed	how	Te	primarily	draws	on	the	left	side	of	the	brain,
which	is	predominantly	analytical	and	impersonal	in	its	workings.	More
specifically,	Dario	Nardi’s	research	suggests	that	Te	can	be	associated	with	the
following	characteristics:
Use	of	“evidence-based”	reasoning	and	practices
Reliance	on	measurable	sensory	information
Oriented	toward	goals	and	task	completion
Propensity	for	quick,	efficient	action	(sometimes	to	the	detriment	of
accuracy)
Nardi	also	associates	Te	with	efficient	utilization	of	brain	resources.	Namely,
when	TJs	are	making	decisions	or	working	toward	an	objective,	only	the	bare
minimum	number	of	brain	regions	tends	to	show	activity;	everything	else	is	shut
down.	This	includes	quieting	emotional	activity	that	could	feasibly	slow	or
otherwise	complicate	the	ETJ’s	work.	Nardi	suggests	this	neurological	efficiency
allows	ETJs	(and	perhaps	other	types	using	Te)	to	quickly	and	effortlessly	make
judgments	and	decisions,	without	much	in	the	way	of	mental	fatigue.	This	helps
explain	their	propensity	and	ability	to	function	effectively	as	managers	and
executives.
When	vacationing	from	their	typical	Te	mode	of	operation,	Nardi	suggests	that
TJs	can	show	high	activity	in	a	brain	region	responsible	for	handling	personal
values.	This	region,	located	on	the	right	side	of	the	brain,	is	characteristically
negative	in	its	affective	evaluations	(e.g.,	“That’s	stupid!”	or	“That’s	morally
reprehensible!”).	This,	of	course,	points	to	TJs’	use	of	Fi,	providing	empirical
confirmation	that	Te	and	Fi	occur	together	as	a	function	pair.
14.	Introverted	Feeling	(Fi)
Primary	roles:	To	explore	and	refine	personal	tastes,	feelings,	and	values,
contributing	to	a	strong	sense	of	personal	uniqueness;	to	maintain	inner
emotional	and	moral	order;	to	emotionally	invest	in	a	limited	number	of	persons,
animals,	or	interests
Most	prominent	in:	INFPs	&	ISFPs;	also	prominent	in	ENFPs	&	ESFPs
Associated	with:	Fighting	for	“underdogs,”	emotional	restraint,	nuanced	morals
and	values,	nurture	and	caregiving,	sensitivity	to	perceived	inequities	and
injustice
Famous	IFPs:	Henry	David	Thoreau,	Jean-Jacque	Rousseau,	Kierkegaard,
Camus,	Virginia	Wolfe,	Van	Gogh,	Luke	Skywalker,	J.D.	Salinger,	Jane	Austen,
Bob	Dylan
IFPs	use	Fi	as	their	dominant	function,	while	EFPs	wield	it	as	their	auxiliary.	Fi
is	an	introverted	judging	function.	Like	the	other	introverted	functions,	it	is
characteristically	intensive	rather	than	extensive.	Rather	than	surveying	and
distributing	feelings	across	a	breadth	of	individuals	(as	Fe	does),	Fi	focuses
largely	on	one’s	own	feelings	and	sentiments.	While	FJs	routinely	turn	to	others
for	emotional	support,	FPs	explore	and	manage	their	emotions	on	a	largely
independent	basis.
Fi	is	also	less	concerned	with	cultivating	group	morale	or	consensus	of	feeling
than	Fe	is.	While	FPs	may	invest	in	the	well-being	of	select	individuals	(e.g.,
their	children),	Fi	is	not	authentically	concerned	with,	nor	does	it	feel
responsible	for,	the	overall	feeling	tenor	of	groups.
FPs	empathize	with,	and	form	attachments	to,	things	that	move	or	personally
affect	them—their	pets,	their	children,	the	needy,	etc.	The	scope	of	Fi
attachments	is	typically	narrower	than	that	of	Fe,	limited	to	a	select	number	of
individuals,	interests,	or	causes.	FPs	may	invest	a	great	deal	of	time	and
emotional	energy	in	a	single	individual,	contributing	to	their	value	as	parents,
caregivers,	therapists,	tutors,	etc.
FPs	can	often	be	found	helping	those	deemed	unable	to	help	themselves—
children,	animals,	the	sick,	the	needy,	the	elderly,	and	so	on.	They	love	to	rescue
those	in	need,	such	as	feeding	stray	animals	or	adopting	pets	from	animal
shelters.	They	also	take	up	niche	causes	that	have	personally	impacted	them,
such	as	raising	awareness	about	a	rare	disease	affecting	a	loved	one.
Being	outwardly	receptive	and	non-judgmental,	IFPs	can	serve	as	veritable
dumping	grounds	for	others’	emotional	baggage.	For	some	IFPs,	this	engenders	a
deep	sense	of	emotional	burden,	as	well	as	a	melancholic	attitude	toward	life.
Constrained	Feeling
Since	Fi	is	introverted	in	direction,	IFPs,	in	particular,	may	not	even	look	like
feelers	when	viewed	from	without.	Outside	of	wielding	their	more	playful	Se	or
Ne	auxiliary,	IFPs	can	seem	cool,	indifferent,	aloof,	and	uninviting.	Giving	little
evidence	of	feeling	in	their	intonations	or	facial	expressions,	some	may	even	be
accused	of	“lacking	personality.”	While	all	introverts	may	at	times	seem	aloof	or
detached,	those	without	Fe	(e.g.,	IFPs	and	ITJs)	are	more	apt	to	be	charged	with
lacking	personality.	Of	course,	such	critiques	are	typically	unwarranted,	since	we
know	that	the	inner	world	of	IFPs	is	rich,	complex,	and	animated	with	feeling.	It
may	require	certain	circumstances,	such	as	engaging	with	pets,	children,	etc.,	for
IFPs’	emotions	to	overflow	into	outward	expression.	Even	then,	they	still	appear
more	constrained	than	what	we	see	in	FJ	types.
While	the	constraining	influence	of	Fi	may	contribute	to	perceptions	of	IFPs
being	aloof	or	indifferent,	it	may	also	be	viewed,	at	least	by	some,	as	a	more
“mature”	way	of	handling	emotions.	Its	extraverted	alternative,	Fe,	expresses
emotions	more	readily,	laying	everything	out	on	the	emotional	table.	Compared
to	Fi,	Fe	may	seem	needy,	melodramatic,	or	attention-seeking.	And	since	FJs
lean	more	on	others	for	emotional	support,	some	may	see	them,	rightly	or
wrongly,	as	less	mature	in	handling	their	emotions.
Refining	Tastes	&	Values
Fi	also	works	to	shape	its	own	worldview,	one	that	can	serve	as	a	platform	for
self-understanding,	self-direction,	and	independent	decision-making.	In	this
sense,	it	resembles	Ti,	which	involves	a	similar	process	of	developing	and
refining	an	inner	map.	This	structuring	process	(i.e.,	inner	judging),	contributing
to	a	sense	of	inner	order	and	personal	identity,	was	nicely	illustrated	by	one	of
my	INFP	blog	contributors:
“My	inner	values	and	feelings	(Fi)	are	like	a	building,	a	structure	of	affections
that	inform	my	worldview.	This	involves	an	inner	love	for	certain	things,	and	an
inner	repulsion	for	other	things.	My	values	and	feelings	form	“blocks”	of
varying	hardness,	depending	on	how	strongly	I	feel	about	them;	the	stronger
ones	are	more	resilient…I	constantly	discover	more	about	the	structure	as	I	go,
and	what	I	should	change	to	make	it	better.	For	example,	I	didn’t	have	to
factually	discern	a	respect	for	human	dignity;	I	simply	found	myself	in	situations
where	people	did	not	respect	human	dignity,	and	it	made	me	angry	—	I	found	out
that	I	hated	bullying.”
IFPs	explore	and	refine	this	inner	structure	of	tastes	and	values	through	art,
reading,	music,	films,	caregiving,	journaling,	creative	writing,	and	so	on.	As	they
refine	and	develop	their	tastes,	values,	and	beliefs,	they	grow	in	their	self-
understanding	and	clarify	what	really	matters	to	them.
Inner	Control
Like	ITPs,	IFPs	feel	they	have	little	control	over	other	people	or	the	outside
world.	They	are	inclined	to	feel,	with	Aldous	Huxley,	that	“there	is	only	one
corner	of	the	universe	you	can	be	certain	of	improving,	and	that’s	your	own
self.”	It	is	therefore	important	that	IFPs	feel	in	control	of	themselves	and	their
lives.	Indeed,	this	is	partly	why	they	invest	so	much	time	and	effort	into
exploring	their	feelings	and	clarifying	their	identity.	They	want	to	figure	out	who
they	are	so	they	can	effectively	be	themselves.
While	IFPs	may	see	themselves	as	outwardly	adaptable	or	easygoing,	they	may
be	somewhat	blind	to	the	degree	to	which	they	need	or	seek	control.	This	is	most
clearly	evidenced	when	they	perceive	others	as	trying	to	control	or	emotionally
manipulate	them,	to	which	they	instinctively	resist	or	retract.	This	helps	explain
IFPs’	reputation	for	not	answering	their	phones	and	their	strong	preference	for
texting.	Texting	affords	them	time	to	formulate	an	authentic	response	without
concern	for	being	“put	on	the	spot”	or	emotionally	manipulated	into	doing
something	they	don't	want	to	do.
Since	IFPs	feel	most	in	control	when	alone,	periods	of	solitude	are	of	great
importance	to	them.	Being	alone	allows	them	to	let	down	their	guard	and	catch
their	breath.	It	gives	them	the	space	they	need	to	freely	explore	their	feelings	and
interests.
Marginalized	&	Misunderstood
IFPs	can	feel	overrun	by	the	fast-paced,	cut-throat	ways	of	modern	society.	Their
propensity	for	feeling	personally	victimized	may	contribute	to	their	sense	of
empathy	for	society’s	victims	and	underlings.	INFPs,	in	particular,	may	struggle
with	the	world’s	ostensible	indifference	to	the	“impractical”	NF	gifts	they	have
to	offer;	the	notion	of	the	“starving	artist”	may	seem	like	a	real	possibility	for
many	INFP	creatives.	Like	INFJs,	they	may	see	themselves	as	chronically
misunderstood,	leading	to	“misfit”	or	“outsider”	self-conceptions.	Many	INFPs
turn	to	music,	writing,	or	art	as	ways	of	exploring	and	expressing	their	feelings
of	being	marginalized	or	misunderstood.
Of	course,	not	all	IFPs	feel	like	outcasts.	INFPs	who	spend	much	of	their	time
engrossed	in	Fi	and	Te,	showing	minimal	use	or	development	of	their	auxiliary
Ne,	tend	to	look	and	feel	more	“normal”	than	the	more	artsy	or	subversive
INFPs.	Of	all	the	FP	types,	ESFPs	are	typically	the	most	conventional	and	least
ideationally	“deviant,”	not	to	mention	the	most	at	home	in	the	world.	As	sensors,
ISFPs	are	also	less	otherworldly	and	therefore	less	apt	to	feel	marginalized.
Combatting	Injustice	&	Defending	Individuality
FPs	often	see	outer	circumstances	(Te)	as	playing	a	prominent	role	in	individual
suffering	(Fi).	FPs	are	more	sensitive	to	instances	of	perceived	inequity,
injustice,	or	victimization	than	other	types.	Not	only	are	they	sensitive	to	the	role
of	unfortunate	circumstances	in	others’	suffering,	but	also	their	own.	Many
recount	an	instance	or	period	of	abuse	or	injustice	that	they	see	as	having	left	an
indelible	imprint	on	their	lives.	IFPs	seem	slower	to	let	go	of	these	things	than
other	types,	often	using	them	as	emotional	fuel	for	their	life’s	purpose.	An	IFP
victim	of	rape	or	molestation,	for	instance,	may	funnel	her	hurt	and	anger	toward
reducing	the	incidence	of	rape	and	related	sex	offenses.	Because	of	IFPs’
tendency	to	remember	or	hold	onto	past	emotional	pain,	they	can	have	a	tragic	or
melancholic	air	about	them	(this	seems	much	rarer	among	EFPs).
FPs	can	also	be	quite	sensitive	to	instances	of	perceived	discrimination	or
stereotyping.	Even	personality	typing	can	be	viewed	as	threatening	by	certain	FP
individuals	wary	of	being	stripped	of	their	personal	uniqueness	(e.g.,	“Don’t	try
to	put	me	in	a	box	or	pigeonhole	me!”).	In	other	words,	because	Fi	celebrates
and	defends	the	tastes,	feelings,	and	values	that	make	each	person	special,	any
attempt	at	reducing	them	to	a	common	denominator	can	feel	offensive	and
dehumanizing.	We	see	the	same	line	of	reasoning	among	Fi	anthropologists
concerned	with	preserving	the	unique	attributes	of	various	tribes	and	cultures,
poised	to	defend	them	against	the	homogenizing	forces	of	globalization.
Fi	vs.	Ti
As	introverted	judging	functions,	Fi	and	Ti	share	much	in	common.	Both	confer
a	sense	of	inner	order	and	structure,	both	are	intensive	and	intentional,	and	both
involve	a	more	subjective	or	individualized	form	of	judging.
Generally	speaking,	Fi	and	Ti	work	to	prevent	individual	preferences	and
methods	from	being	swallowed	up	by	collective	systems	and	approaches.	They
thus	serve	as	important	and	necessary	counterbalances	to	Fe	and	Te	power
structures.	Ti	counters	the	bureaucracies	and	standardized	methods	of	Te,	while
Fi	rallies	against	the	homogenizing	social	and	moral	forces	of	Fe.	Since	IFPs	use
Te	in	addition	to	Fi,	they	are	typically	more	tolerant	of	standardized	methods	and
institutions	than	ITPs	tends	to	be.	Like	TJ	types,	FPs	can	appreciate	(or	at	least
tolerate)	external	systems	that	feel	orderly	and	rational.	This	helps	explain	why
FPs	far	outnumber	TPs	among	office	and	administrative	staff.	Rather	than
revolting	against	Te	systems,	IFPs	are	more	inclined	to	resist	Fe	conventions	and
social	niceties,	especially	those	conflicting	with	their	sense	of	personal
authenticity.	They	may,	for	instance,	refuse	to	put	on	a	“happy	face”	when
they’re	not	feeling	happy,	or	to	feign	warmth	or	friendliness	toward	individuals
they	don’t	really	know	or	respect.	Schmoozing	or	socializing	for	its	own	sake	is
typically	frowned	upon	by	IFPs.
ITPs	and	IFPs	are	also	alike	in	their	tendency	to	see	their	own	preferences	as
worthy	of	wide-scale	adoption.	They	may	believe	that	if	others	would	only
follow	their	example	that	the	world	could	be	greatly	improved.	ITPs	may	dream
of	universalizing	their	Ti	methods	and	strategies,	while	IFPs	may	conjure
utopian	visions	exemplifying	their	Fi	values.	These	sorts	of	collective	aspirations
are	ironic	in	light	of	IPs’	own	resistance	to	externally-imposed	methods	or
directives.
Ti	and	Fi	also	differ	in	some	important	ways.	While	IFPs	are	moved	to	help	the
sick,	needy,	or	disenfranchised,	TPs	shy	away	from	routine	helping	or
caretaking.	IFPs	also	take	interest	in	art,	poetry,	fiction,	music,	and	the	like,
while	ITPs	gravitate	toward	strategic,	conceptual,	scientific,	or	technical
pursuits.	Of	course,	these	lines	can	at	times	be	blurred	by	the	inferior	function,
which,	for	better	or	worse,	may	prompt	IFPs	to	pursue	T	interests	and	ITPs	to
pursue	F	ones.
Fi	&	the	Brain
According	to	Dario	Nardi,	IFPs	(especially	INFPs)	are	among	the	most
empathetic	listeners.	More	specifically,	he	associates	Fi	with:
Holistic	listening
Attending	to	withheld	information,	i.e.,	being	curious	about	what	others	are
really	thinking	or	feeling
Ranking	or	prioritizing	things	according	to	their	perceived	value
Diminished	activity	in	brain	regions	associated	with	logic
Despite	their	heavy	reliance	on	Fi	judgments,	Nardi	reports	that	IFPs	can	also
invoke	left-brained	logic	in	their	decision-making	(Te).	So	if	they	find
themselves	in	a	pinch,	when	decisions	needs	to	be	made,	IFPs	may	turn	to	Te,
which,	as	we’ve	seen,	is	capable	of	making	decisions	with	remarkable	speed,
firmness,	and	efficiency.
15.	Extraverted	Feeling	(Fe)
Primary	roles:	To	survey	a	breadth	of	human	emotions,	values,	and	morals,
striving	toward	interpersonal	or	group	consensus;	to	directly	express	feelings	and
judgments;	to	instruct	or	motivate	others	toward	growth	and	excellence
Most	prominent	in:	ENFJs	&	ESFJs;	also	prominent	in	INFJs	&	ISFJs
Associated	with:	An	interpersonal	focus,	emotional	expressiveness,
communication	skills,	talkativeness,	attunement	to	social	norms,	advice-giving
Famous	EFJs:	Dr.	Martin	Luther	King,	Dr.	Phil	McGraw,	Frasier	Crane
(television)
Fe	serves	as	the	dominant	function	for	EFJs	and	the	auxiliary	for	IFJs.
Numerically	second	to	only	NPs	and	NJs,	FJs	are	among	the	rarer	personality
types.	They	do	appear	more	common,	however,	among	African-American
females.
EFJs	are	animated,	talkative,	assertive,	and	persuasive.	They	are	the	kings	and
queens	of	social	affairs,	capable	of	quickly	reading	and	establishing	rapport	with
others.	Because	of	their	social	intelligence	and	love	for	people,	EFJs	develop
networks	of	friends,	acquaintances,	and	social	connections.
The	Interpersonal	Nature	of	Fe
Fe	plays	a	prominent	role	in	attuning	to	and	empathizing	with	others’	emotions.
It	reads	and	recreates	others’	emotional	states,	allowing	FJs	to	feel	what	others
are	feeling.	Knowing	what	others	are	feeling	is	of	great	importance	to	FJs,	who
place	high	value	on	establishing	emotional	rapport	and	mutual	understanding.	In
short,	they	want	everyone	to	be	on	the	same	emotional	page.
The	pleasure	derived	from	cultivating	rapport	contributes	to	FJs’	propensity	for
supporting	and	counseling	others.	NFJs,	in	particular,	see	it	as	their	job	to	help
others	live	more	ethically,	healthily,	and	authentically.	Utilizing	their	insight	into
people,	they	identify	problems	and	formulate	solutions	that	promote	growth	and
healing.	And	because	NFJs	are	verbally	persuasive,	others	often	respond	well	to
their	counsel.	This	is	especially	true	of	those	actually	seeking	their	assistance,
since	FJs	can	be	inclined	to	dole	out	unsolicited	advice.
Meeting	others’	needs	and	maintaining	interpersonal	harmony	are	also	important
to	FJs.	Feeling	responsible	for	the	well-being	of	others,	they	work	hard	to	ensure
that	people	are	getting	along	and	that	their	needs	are	met.	Toward	this	end,	they
can	be	self-sacrificing,	deferring	their	own	needs	for	the	sake	of	others.	From
this	we	learn	that,	more	than	any	other	function,	Fe	is	interpersonal	in	nature.	In
many	respects,	FJs	are	unable	to	think	only	of	themselves.	At	least	in	theory,
they	are	the	least	self-focused	of	all	the	types	(especially	EFJs).
Despite	their	interest	in	orchestrating	social	harmony,	FJs	also	feel	it	important
to	directly	express	their	own	feelings	and	opinions.	After	all,	Fe	is	an	extraverted
judging	function.	Unlike	FPs,	who	tend	to	bottle-up	and	handle	their	emotions
on	an	independent	basis,	FJs’	natural	style	is	to	deal	with	their	emotions	out	in
the	open.	And	because	their	words	are	often	bathed	in	emotion,	FJs	can	seem
intense	and	dramatic	in	their	expressions.	While	other	types	may	view	them	as
somewhat	irrational	or	melodramatic,	Fe	expressions	are	rational	in	the	sense	of
conveying	the	nature	and	strength	of	the	experienced	emotion.	Moreover,
because	Fe	is	fairly	rare,	people	often	wrongly	assume	FJs	to	be	more	upset	than
they	really	are.	In	many	cultures,	people	are	simply	not	accustomed	to
encountering	strong,	feeling-laden	expressions.
Fe	can	present	differently	among	strangers	than	it	does	with	intimates.	At	least	in
many	American	social	settings,	FJs	feel	compelled	to	be	"positive”	in	their
demeanor	and	expressions,	to	put	on	a	“happy	face.”	In	the	company	of	close
confidants,	however,	FJs	feel	they	can	drop	the	social	façade	and	express	their
complaints	and	grievances.	Indeed,	expressing	their	feelings	via	Fe	is	critical	to
FJs’	psychological	(and	physical)	health.	Even	if	doing	so	fails	to	furnish	an
immediate	solution	to	the	problem	at	hand,	they	tend	to	feel	better	once	they
have	aired	their	feelings,	be	it	through	words	or	tears.	Therefore,	healthy	FJs
invariably	have	at	least	one	reliable	friend	or	confidant	with	whom	they	can
openly	and	candidly	express	their	concerns,	opinions,	and	grievances.
Fe	&	Social	Norms
As	is	true	of	Te,	there	is	a	certain	formalness	to	Fe.	Namely,	Fe	is	highly	attuned
to	social	norms	and	conventions,	using	these	as	benchmarks	for	appropriate
social	behavior.	This	may	include	considering	what	is	appropriate	to	bring,	wear,
or	say	under	a	given	set	of	social	conditions.	Notions	such	as	tact,	manners,	and
social	grace	are	examples	of	Fe	norms.
With	that	said,	it	is	also	important	to	recognize	that	Fe	norms	and	customs	will
vary	by	culture.	Hence,	there	is	a	universal	as	well	as	a	culturally-specific	aspect
to	Fe.	The	universal	aspect	involves	a	concern	for	others	and	for	establishing
feeling	consensus	in	the	social	and	moral	spheres.	Religious	proselytizing	is	one
such	example,	which	involves	the	promotion	of	what	are	viewed	as	universal,
God-ordained	moral	laws.
The	Fe-Ti	Function	Pair
Fe	and	Ti	comprise	a	single	function	pair,	employed	by	FJ	as	well	as	TP	types.
The	Fe-Ti	function	pair	fosters	a	tension	between	self	(Ti)	and	others	(Fe),	as
well	as	inner	control	(Ti)	and	outer	control	(Fe).
For	TPs,	Ti	is	the	more	conscious	member	of	the	function	pair.	Because	of	its
predominance,	TPs	see	themselves	as	independent	agents	with	a	strong	sense	of
inner	control.	At	the	same	time,	they	tend	to	wither	without	some	degree	of
social	contact	(Fe),	an	experience	which	prompts	their	participation	in
relationships,	team	sports,	fraternities,	country	clubs,	etc.	In	each	of	these	arenas,
we	see	droves	of	TPs	(typically	males)	who,	while	relishing	their	Ti	work,	also
enjoy	rubbing	elbows	with	their	comrades	in	a	brotherly	sort	of	way.	Hence,
there	is	a	certain	superficiality	to	TPs’	use	of	Fe.
Fe	is	far	more	developed	and	nuanced	in	FJs	than	it	is	in	TPs.	Due	to	its	higher
position	in	the	functional	stack,	FJs	show	strong	differentiation	of	their	Fe.	Their
capacity	to	experience	and	distinguish	a	wide	variety	of	feeling	tones	is	vast.
While	TPs	may	aspire	to	refine	their	Fe,	they	are	more	amateurish	in	their	Fe
capacities,	devoid	of	the	natural	skill	and	grace	displayed	by	FJs.	In	a	similar
fashion,	FJs	may	work	to	develop	their	capacity	for	Ti	logic,	but	may	never
approach	the	level	of	mastery	naturally	available	to	TP	types.
Fe	and	Ti	also	contribute	to	control	issues.	While	ITPs	typically	feel	they	have
little	control	over	the	outside	world,	the	inner	order	granted	by	their	Ti	confers	a
strong	sense	of	self-control.	EFJs,	by	contrast,	don’t	enjoy	the	luxury	of	inner
control,	relying	instead	on	their	Fe	to	procure	a	sense	of	outer	control.	With	that
said,	there	are	times	when	these	types	are	tempted	to	extend	their	reach	of
control.	ITPs	may	be	tempted	to	assume	leadership	positions,	while	EFJs	may
take	measures	to	feel	more	in	control	of	themselves.	If	and	when	such	attempts
fall	flat,	these	types	revert	back	to	their	natural	modes	of	operating.
Fe	vs.	Te
As	we’ve	seen,	Te	involves	the	use	of	standardized,	collective	methods	(e.g.,	the
scientific	method,	“evidenced-based”	thinking,	etc.)	in	hopes	of	making	the
world	and	its	operations	more	rational.	Fe	resembles	Te	in	its	concern	for
collective	standards.	But	rather	than	concerning	itself	with	T	matters,	it	focuses
on	F	standards,	such	as	shared	values,	morals,	and	social	practices.	While	Fe
standards	may	differ	by	culture,	as	well	as	by	group	size	(e.g.,	family,
community,	nation,	etc.),	they	all	privilege	the	needs	of	the	collective	over	those
of	the	individual.
In	addition	to	the	different	aims	of	their	standardizing	efforts,	Fe	and	Te	also
differ	in	the	tone	and	manner	of	their	expressions.	While	the	content	of	Fe
expressions	need	not	be	emotional,	there	is	a	discernible	difference	in	their
packaging	compared	to	those	of	Te.	Namely,	Te	can	present	as	rather	dry,
lifeless,	and	monotonal.	Its	purpose	is	to	relay	information	in	an	explicit	and
literal	fashion.	Fe	expressions,	by	contrast,	are	often	infused	with	feeling	and
inflection.	Their	tone	is	rich,	full,	and	colorful.	The	most	persuasive	of	all	types,
FJs	have	the	power	to	move	and	motivate	us.	Even	if	the	content	of	their
message	is	not	profound	or	earth-shattering,	its	emotional	packaging	can	render
it	powerful	and	convincing.	While	Te	expressions	may	be	more	precise	and
exacting	(e.g.,	a	scientific	lecture),	those	of	Fe	are	more	stirring	and	inspiring
(e.g.,	a	moving	speech).
Fe	vs.	Fi
Fe	works	broadly	and	extensively,	while	Fi	penetrates	more	deeply	and
intensively.	Fe	is	more	concerned	with	collective	morale,	while	Fi	focuses	more
on	the	feelings	of	the	self	or	a	select	few	individuals.	Like	FJs,	FPs	tend	to	prefer
external	harmony,	but	this	is	more	reflective	of	their	personal	discomfort	with
conflict	(i.e.,	their	own	disquieting	feelings)	than	of	a	genuine	concern	for
interpersonal	harmony.
The	following	scenario	is	sometimes	useful	for	differentiating	Fi	and	Fe.
Imagine	you	are	involved	in	a	social	gathering,	hosted	by	someone	else,
involving	six	couples,	three	of	which	are	new	to	the	group.	Now	ask	yourself	the
following	questions:
Would	I	feel	responsible	for	ensuring	that	the	newer	couples	feel
comfortable	and	at	ease?
Would	I	go	out	of	my	way	to	reach	out	to	them	and	help	them	assimilate	to
the	group?
Is	helping	newcomers	feel	welcome	and	comfortable	in	social	settings	one
of	my	natural	skills?
Generally	speaking,	FJs	answer	“yes”	to	each	of	the	above	questions,	whereas
FPs	(especially	IFPs)	tend	to	answer	“no”	or	feel	more	ambivalent	in	their
responses.	IFPs	generally	feel	less	responsible	for	ensuring	the	emotional
comfort	of	the	group’s	newcomers.	This	makes	perfect	sense	when	we	consider
that	FPs	see	themselves	as	managers	of	their	own	emotions,	so	it	is	only	natural
that	they	expect	others	to	do	the	same.	FJs,	on	the	other	hand,	are	more	inclined
to	rely	on	others	for	emotional	support,	so	they	naturally	assume	that	others
desire	the	same.
As	we’ve	seen,	Fi	and	Fe	also	differ	with	respect	to	emotional	expressiveness.
FPs,	in	being	more	emotionally	independent,	tend	to	restrain	and	conceal	their
emotions.	They	therefore	present	as	more	outwardly	measured	and	less	animated
in	their	gestures	and	expressions.	FJ	expressions	are	more	direct	and	feeling-
laden,	conferring	a	greater	sense	of	urgency	or	conviction	in	what	they	are
saying.	At	times,	it	can	feel	like	FJs	(especially	NFJs)	have	fallen	into	a
motivational	speech	in	the	midst	of	an	ordinary	conversation.
Fi-Fe	differences	can	sometimes	make	communication	strained	or	uncomfortable
between	Fi	and	Fe	types.	IFPs	can	be	wary	of	Fe	judgments	and	expressions.	To
IFPs,	Fe	expressions	may	seem	contrived,	predictable,	melodramatic,	or	overly
opinionated.	IFPs	have	little	patience	for	what	they	see	as	showy	or
disingenuous	emotional	displays.	This	is	why	they	exempt	themselves	from
certain	Fe	norms	or	conventions	that	they	see	hindering	or	compromising
emotional	authenticity.	IFPs	may	also	resist	FJ	attempts	to	advise	them	or	to
cajole	them	to	talk	more	openly	or	directly	about	emotional	issues.
FJs	may	struggle	with	IFPs’	seeming	lack	of	warmth	or	helpfulness.	For
instance,	an	FJ	friend	of	mine	has	complained	on	numerous	occasions	about	IFP
sales	associates,	seeing	them	as	unwelcoming,	uncommunicative,	and	unwilling
to	go	out	their	way	to	be	helpful.
FJs	may	also	take	issue	with	IFPs’	reluctance	or	inability	to	be	more	forthright
with	their	judgments	and	feelings.	They	may	find	themselves	wishing	that	IFPs
would	simply	say	what	they	want	or	express	what	they	are	feeling	rather	than
relying	on	hints	or	other	indirect	clues.	More	specifically,	they	may	bemoan
IFPs’	propensity	for	moodiness	and	causing	others	to	“walk	on	eggshells,”	while
being	unwilling	to	directly	express	their	feelings	or	address	the	problem	at	hand.
Such	displays	of	passive-aggressiveness	are	foreign	and	bemusing	to	the	more
direct	and	forthright	FJ	types.
Fe	&	the	Brain
According	to	Dario	Nardi,	FJs’	brain	activity	reflects	a	concern	for	interpersonal
matters	and	social	responsibilities.	More	specifically,	Nardi’s	research	reveals
the	following	characteristics	of	FJ	types:
Focused	on	people-related	issues	and	objectives
Stimulated	by	communicating	explanations	and	decisions
Use	value-laden	language
Skillfully	adjust	to	social	feedback
Nardi	also	reports	that	EFJs	show	activity	in	one	or	two	brain	regions	associated
with	Ti,	supporting	the	theory	that	Ti	and	Fe	occur	and	work	together	as	a
function	pair.	
Part	IV:	Additional	Clarification
16.	Type	Structuring:	What	It	Tells	Us	about
EPs,	EJs,	IPs,	&	IJs
A	couple	years	ago,	my	colleague	Elaine	Schallock	developed	the	theory	that,	in
the	natural	order	of	things,	each	personality	type	would	move	in	a	more	or	less
sequential	fashion	through	the	functions	in	its	functional	stack	over	the	course	of
a	day.	More	specifically,	each	type	would	prefer	to	start	the	day	engaging	its
dominant	function,	before	eventually	moving	into	its	auxiliary,	tertiary,	and
inferior.
Schallock’s	theory	seems	to	hold	true	in	my	personal	experience.	My	preference
as	an	INTP	is	to	work	on	my	writing	in	the	morning	and,	time	permitting,	well
into	the	afternoon.	Then	once	my	mind	fatigues	or	interest	wanes,	I	naturally
turn	to	S	things	like	household	chores,	jogging,	or	yoga.	By	the	time	evening
rolls	around,	I’m	often	ready	to	engage	with	other	people	in	conversation	(Fe).
I’ve	noticed	the	reverse	trend	in	sensing	types,	who	commonly	enjoy	exercising
and	completing	physical	tasks	earlier	in	the	day.
The	point	is	we	naturally	gravitate	toward	our	type’s	strengths	and	preferences
early	in	the	day,	when	we	are	most	refreshed	and	energized.	Moreover,	on	days
when	we	fail	to	exercise	our	core	strengths,	we	often	feel	dissatisfied,	sensing
that	something	essential	was	left	out.
If	we	apply	this	line	of	thinking	to	the	functional	stacks	of	EJs	and	IPs,	these
types	would	start	their	day	in	judging	mode	(Te,	Fe,	Ti,	or	Fi),	eventually	move
into	auxiliary	and	tertiary	perceiving,	and	then	finish	in	judging	(inferior).	EPs
and	IJs	would	display	the	opposite	sequence,	starting	in	perceiving	(Se,	Ne,	Si,
or	Ni),	eventually	moving	into	judging,	and	then	returning	to	perceiving.	This
prompted	Schallock	to	classify	EJs	and	IPs	as	“J-P-J”	types	and	EPs	and	IJs	as
“P-J-P”	types.
In	the	first	part	of	this	chapter,	we	will	explore	some	of	the	details	and
implications	of	Schallock’s	theory,	including	the	ramifications	of	EJs	and	IPs
using	a	dominant	judging	function	and	EPs	and	IJs	wielding	a	dominant
perceiving	function.	In	the	second	half	of	the	chapter,	I	will	provide	general
descriptions	of	EP,	EJ,	IP,	and	IJ	types,	which	are	intended	to	integrate	some	of
the	J-P	nuances	and	complexities	discussed	throughout	this	book.
“J-P-J”	Types:	EJs	&	IPs
Dominant	Function:	J	function
Auxiliary	&	Tertiary:	P	functions
Inferior	Function:	J	function
As	indicated	above,	EJs	and	IPs	exhibit	similarities	in	the	structuring	of	their
functional	stacks.	They	start	out	with	a	judging	function,	move	into	perceiving,
and	eventually	return	to	judging	(J-P-J).
Considering	that	their	dominant	function	is	a	judging	function,	IPs,	like	EJs,	are
in	some	respects	well	understood	as	predominant	judgers.	IPs	are	inner	judgers,
cultivating	inner	control	and	order	by	way	of	Ti	or	Fi,	while	EJs	are	outer
judgers,	working	to	procure	outer	control	through	Te	or	Fe.	Just	as	EJs	are
sometimes	viewed	as	outer	control	freaks,	IPs	are	inner	control	freaks.
While	thinking	of	IPs	as	predominant	judgers	may	seem	confusing	or	even
contradictory,	it	is	less	so	if	you	remember	that	the	J-P	preference	primarily
references	a	type’s	outer	presentation.	So	even	though	IPs	are	judgers	inwardly,
they	remain	perceivers	outwardly.
As	predominant	judgers,	EJs	and	IPs	work	to	hammer	down	what	they	believe,
building	a	worldview	that	can	inform	their	purpose	and	direction.	When	their
worldview	or	sense	of	direction	is	unsettled,	they	may	feel	anxious	or	aimless.
This	anxiety	prompts	them	to	seek	J	answers,	working	to	restore	a	comfortable
level	of	closure.
Their	dominant	judging	function	also	prompts	EJs	and	IPs	to	take	life	rather
seriously	and	approach	it	with	intentionality.	They	are	prone	to	consider	various
perceiving	activities	as	“wasting	time”	(e.g.,	watching	television)	and	certain	IJ
or	EP	individuals	as	lazy	or	unproductive.	At	the	same	time,	they	may	envy	IJs’
and	EPs’	ability	to	relax---to	sit	back	and	take	life	in	(i.e.,	to	perceive).	Often
thinking	in	terms	of	what	they	should	be	doing,	EJs	and	IPs	may	struggle	with
activities	they	see	as	lacking	a	serious	purpose	(e.g.,	playing	games),	especially
if	asked	to	do	so	for	extended	periods	of	time.	Although	they	may	enjoy
perceiving	for	a	while,	it’s	usually	not	long	before	they	feel	compelled	to	be
“productive.”
In	short,	EJs	and	IPs	have	difficulty	“perceiving	for	the	sake	of	perceiving.”
They	are	more	likely	to	engage	in	what	we	might	call	“perceiving	with	a
purpose.”	An	IP	author,	for	instance,	might	read	certain	books	or	research
articles	that	she	sees	as	necessary	for	informing	or	advancing	her	work.	EJs	and
IPs	are	less	likely	to	read	(or	partake	in	other	perceiving	activities)	for	the	simple
pleasure	of	doing	so.	Instead,	their	perceiving	activities	are	often	framed	as
contributing	to	their	personal	enrichment	or	as	furthering	their	current	or	future
objectives.	Even	playing	with	their	children	may	be	framed	in	J	terms	such	as
“bonding	time.”	Hence,	J-P-J	types	tend	to	use	perceiving	as	a	means	to	a	felt	or
imagined	J	end.
It	is	rarely	long	after	waking	that	EJs’	and	IPs’	dominant	J	function	works	to
identify	what	its	first	objective	will	be.	Thus,	when	it	comes	to	initiating	tasks,
IPs	can	be	as	disciplined	and	intentional	as	EJs.	It	is	mainly	after	starting	a	task
that	IPs	get	sidetracked	and	start	looking	more	like	EPs.	This	is	understandable
in	light	of	the	fact	that	their	auxiliary	function	is	more	divergent	and	open-ended
in	nature	(Ne	or	Se).	Their	tendency	to	get	sidetracked	or	lack	follow-through
can	be	a	source	of	frustration	for	IPs,	since	the	endpoint	of	their	functional	stack
(e.g.,	their	inferior	Te	or	Fe	function)	represents	a	state	of	closure.	This	desired
state	of	closure	might	entail	finishing	a	project,	making	a	firm	decision,	or
finding	a	“once	and	for	all”	answer.	This	is	why	I	suggested	in	Chapter	6	that	IPs
“seek,	but	struggle	to	obtain,	closure.”
Their	inferior	function's	push	for	closure	can	make	EJs	and	IPs	prone	to
impatience	and	to	rushing	through	their	work.	IPs,	in	particular,	may	feel	that	if
they	don’t	work	quickly	they	may	lose	motivation	and	fail	to	finish.	Quick	work
and	short-cuts	also	bespeak	the	J	tendency	to	“get	to	the	point”	or	“cut	to	the
chase.”	Unfortunately,	a	sense	of	J	urgency	can	contribute	to	myriad	errors	and
oversights,	as	well	as	poorer	quality	work.
Visually,	the	J-P-J	process	resembles	a	diamond.	It	starts	with	a	specific
objective	(J),	diverges	outwardly	(P),	and	then	converges	back	toward	a	point	of
closure	(J).	We	can	summarize	this	in	the	following	way:
Start	with	Dominant	J	Function:	Intentionality,	e.g.,	“I	should	or	want	to	do...”
Move	into	Auxiliary	/	Tertiary	P	Tunctions:	May	get	sidetracked	(especially	IPs)
Endpoint	(Inferior	J):	Desired	point	of	closure
“P-J-P”	Types:	EPs	&	IJs
Dominant	Function:	P	function
Auxiliary	&	Tertiary:	J	functions
Inferior	Function:	P	function
EPs	and	IJs	also	exhibit	similarities	in	the	structuring	of	their	functional	stacks.
They	start	out	with	a	perceiving	function,	move	into	judging,	and	eventually
return	to	perceiving	(P-J-P).	In	light	of	the	fact	that	their	dominant	function	is	a
perceiving	function,	IJs,	like	EPs,	are	in	some	respects	well	understood	as
predominant	perceivers.	More	specifically,	IJs	are	“inner	perceivers.”
As	predominant	perceivers,	IJs,	like	EPs,	can	struggle	when	it	comes	to	initiating
tasks	or	projects.	Just	as	it	is	difficult	for	IPs	and	EJs	to	“perceive	for	the	sake	of
perceiving,”	it	can	be	difficult	for	IJs	and	EPs	to	“judge	for	the	sake	of	judging.”
While	J-P-J	types	may	see	perceiving	as	somewhat	“unproductive,”	IJs	and	EPs
tend	to	see	things	differently.	For	them,	perceiving	is	both	productive	and
enjoyable	in	its	own	right.	It	is	productive	in	the	sense	that	effective	action	or
sound	judgments	demand	accurate	perception.	And	because	accurate	perception
often	takes	time,	including	the	collection	and	consideration	of	ample
information,	they	see	no	need	to	rush	into	judgments.
While	IJs	and	EPs	undoubtedly	love	to	perceive,	there	are	times	when	they
would	like	to	create	or	accomplish	something	but	lack	the	necessary	motivation
or	stimulation	to	move	into	judging.	They	may	have	good	ideas	or	intentions,	but
never	get	around	to	expressing	or	enacting	them.	Indeed,	there	may	be	times
when	they	envy	IPs’	and	EJs’	ability	to	readily	develop	and	dive	into	J	projects.
Granted,	not	all	IJs	and	EPs	will	struggle	with	jumpstarting	their	own	projects,
especially	those	with	a	strong	thirst	for	achievement	or	ego	gratification	(e.g.,
Steve	Jobs).	But	in	many	cases,	they	seem	to	need	a	stronger	push,	be	it	from
within	or	without,	to	get	the	ball	rolling	in	the	direction	of	what	we	might	call	“J
productivity.”
EPs	and	IJs	are	less	concerned	with	actively	seeking	closure	than	EJs	and	IPs.
This	is	due	to	the	fact	that	both	their	dominant	and	inferior	functions	are
perceiving	functions.	So	not	only	do	they	prefer	perceiving	on	the	front	end	by
way	of	the	dominant	function,	but	their	desired	endpoint	(i.e.,	the	inferior)	is	also
a	state	of	perceiving.
A	signature	strength	of	the	P-J-P	process	is	patience.	Since	IJs	and	EPs	don't
experience	the	same	urge	for	closure	that	J-P-J	types	do,	they	tend	to	be	more
patient	in	their	work,	prioritizing	accuracy	over	speed	and	quality	over	quantity.
Their	focus	on	quality	and	accuracy	may	translate	into	perfectionism	or
meticulousness.	This	is	especially	common	among	IJs,	but	is	also	evident	in
some	EPs.
Visually,	the	P-J-P	process	resembles	an	hourglass.	It	begins	with	a	state	of
relaxed	perceiving	(P),	transitions	into	a	state	of	judging	or	more	focused
behavior	(J),	and	then	reverts	back	to	a	state	of	perception	(P):
Start	with	Dominant	P	Function:	A	state	of	relaxed	perceiving
Move	into	Auxiliary	/	Tertiary	J	functions:	Judging	/	focused	behavior
Endpoint	(Inferior	P):	Desired	state	of	perception
EP	Types
In	light	of	the	above	discussion,	EPs	are	well	conceived	as	the	“purest”
perceivers	of	all	the	types.	Not	only	do	they	display	perceiving	in	their	outer
behavior	and	demeanor	(e.g.,	open,	adaptable,	receptive,	etc.),	but	their	dominant
function	(Ne	or	Se)	is	also	a	perceiving	function.
As	dominant	perceivers,	EPs	tend	to	be	less	proactive	(in	the	J	sense)	than	EJs	or
IPs.	Rather	than	formulating	goals	or	initiating	action	on	the	front	end,	their
natural	propensity	is	to	wait	for	something	to	spur	them	into	action.	Consider,	for
example,	the	ESP	firefighter,	who	routinely	awaits	new	emergencies,	or	the	ENP
journalist	who	patiently	waits	for	a	good	story	to	come	her	way.	As	extraverted
perceivers,	many	EPs	find	that	walking,	driving,	or	being	around	people	helps
kick-start	their	perceptive	juices.	Others	may	turn	to	various	forms	of	media	and
entertainment	for	stimulation.
ESPs	are	wired	to	adapt	and	respond	to	immediate	circumstances,	to	“fly	by	the
seat	of	their	pants.”	This	often	involves	some	form	of	physical	action,	which	is
why	they	make	great	athletes,	performers,	and	emergency	responders.	ENPs,	by
contrast,	are	geared	to	respond	in	more	abstract	ways,	such	as	proffering	new
ideas,	options,	or	possibilities.	While	it	is	most	natural	and	optimal	for	ESPs	to
respond	in	S	ways	and	ENPs	in	N	ways,	the	inferior	function	may	occasionally
incite	these	types	to	go	against	the	grain	of	their	dominant	function.
The	inferior	function	may	cause	ENPs	to	feel	torn	between	the	familiar	(Si)	and
novel	(Ne),	the	past	(Si)	and	the	future	(Ne),	the	conventional	(Si)	and	the
unconventional	(Ne).	To	a	certain	extent,	ENPs	get	attached	to	the	traditions	and
patterns	of	their	childhood	(Si),	even	if	largely	subconsciously.	At	the	same	time,
their	Ne	prompts	them	to	question	everything	and	explore	alternatives.	This	can
contribute	to	significant	identity	confusion	among	ENPs,	who	may	struggle	to
discern	how	far	they	should	break	from	their	past	(Si)	versus	open-endedly
exploring	alternative	ideas	and	possibilities	(Ne).
Similarly,	ESPs	must	strike	a	balance	between	their	dominant	Se	and	inferior	Ni.
They	can	be	seen	as	working	to	reconcile	divergent	outer	perception	(Se)	with
convergent	inner	perception	(Ni).	Their	Se	seeks	to	experience	the	material
world	in	all	its	forms	and	diversity,	whereas	Ni	is	concerned	with	extracting	deep
and	abstract	meanings	and	explanations.	Se	focuses	on	the	way	things	appear	on
the	surface,	while	Ni	peers	beneath	appearances	to	apprehend	something	deeper.
ESPs	may	therefore	feel	torn	between	broadly	exploring	sensory	novelties	(Se)
and	developing	a	deeper	sense	of	knowing	and	understanding	(Ni).	At	times,
their	inferior	Ni	may,	for	better	or	worse,	inspire	them	to	seek	work	as	advisors,
counselors,	ministers,	etc.,	vocations	associated	with	wisdom	and	insight.
EJ	Types
If	EPs	are	the	purest	perceivers,	EJs	are	the	purest	judgers.	Not	only	do	EJs
display	judging	in	their	outer	behavior	and	demeanor	(e.g.,	firm,	opinionated,
directive,	etc.),	but	their	dominant	function	(Te	or	Fe)	is	also	a	judging	function,
which	contributes	a	proactive,	intentional	approach	to	life.	For	EJs	and	EPs
alike,	“what	you	see	is	what	you	get,”	that	is,	their	outer	personality	is	typically
an	accurate	reflection	of	who	they	really	are.
EJs	are	born	leaders	and	teachers.	They	are	direct,	uninhibited,	and	outwardly
confident.	At	times,	others	may	see	them	as	pushy	or	overbearing.	They	are	also
highly	intentional	and	goal-oriented,	which	can	beget	impatience	and	frustration
when	things	diverge	from	their	expected	agenda.	In	the	presence	of	EJs,	others
may	feel	rushed	or	hurried,	sensing	that	the	EJ	wants	them	to	“cut	to	the	chase.”
Despite	their	outer	confidence	and	imposing	presence,	EJs	are	no	more	inwardly
secure	or	sure	of	themselves	than	other	types.	In	fact,	because	their	inner	judging
function	(Ti	or	Fi)	is	inferior,	they	may	be	deeply	insecure.	Finding	inner	control
elusive,	they	naturally	turn	their	focus	outwardly,	hoping	that	achieving	outer
control	will	somehow	translate	into	inner	peace	and	security.	Of	course,
controlling	the	outer	world	is	not	always	easy,	which	keeps	some	EJs	in	a
perpetual	state	of	hypervigilance.
As	we	saw	with	the	EP	types,	EJs	must	constantly	reckon	with	the	needs	and
desires	of	their	inferior	function.	When	indulging	their	inferior	Fi	or	Ti,	EJs	can
get	mired	in	a	state	of	trying	to	help,	fix,	or	control	themselves.	When	this
occurs,	their	focus	shifts	from	one	of	outer	control,	which	comes	rather	naturally
to	them,	to	one	of	grasping	for	inner	control	or	self-sufficiency.
EFJs’	chief	psychological	struggle	consists	of	forging	a	balance	between	their
dominant	Fe	and	inferior	Ti,	between	interdependence	(Fe)	and	independence
(Ti),	managing	others	(Fe)	and	managing	themselves	(Ti).	In	the	grip	of	Ti,	the
usually	social	EFJ	can	suddenly	become	aloof	and	self-consumed.	They	may
bury	themselves	in	stacks	of	books	in	hopes	of	honing	their	logic	or	augmenting
their	sense	of	self-control.	At	times,	this	may	even	cause	them	to	mistype	as
introverts	or	thinkers.
For	ETJs,	the	struggle	is	one	of	managing	external	systems	and	operations	(Te)
versus	exploring	and	handling	their	personal	feelings	(Fi).	In	the	grip	of	Fi,	the
typically	outer-directed	ETJ	may	become	mired	in	his	or	her	emotions.	Such
feelings	often	have	a	negative	tone	and	may	manifest	as	bouts	of	sulking,	self-
pity,	moodiness,	or	low	self-esteem.	Occasionally,	their	inferior	Fi	may	cause
ETJs	to	misidentify	as	introverts	or	feelers.
IP	Types
As	we’ve	seen,	IPs	are	a	mixture	of	J-P	characteristics.	While	their	auxiliary	Se
or	Ne	begets	an	outwardly	receptive	attitude,	their	dominant	Ti	or	Fi	contributes
to	their	status	as	“inner	judgers.”	And	because	their	judgments	are	introverted	in
direction,	they	typically	remain	concealed	from	others,	leaving	others	with	little
clue	as	to	what	they	are	thinking	or	feeling.	In	contrast	to	EJs	and	EPs,	what	you
see	is	not	really	what	you	get	with	IPs	(or	IJs	for	that	matter).	For	introverts,
their	extraverted	presentation	belies	their	true	inner	nature.
Because	their	extraverted	judging	function	(Fe	or	Te)	is	inferior,	IPs	are	the
slowest	of	all	types	to	express	their	judgments.	This	is	why	IPs	are	commonly
viewed	as	patient	and	receptive	listeners.	Their	outer	passivity	and	receptiveness
can	make	them	easy	targets	for	extraverts	or	J	types	looking	for	a	listening	ear.
But	IPs	are	not	always	as	eager	to	listen	as	their	appearance	might	suggest.	As
inner	Js,	they	are	not	nearly	as	passive	or	relaxed	inwardly	as	they	may	appear
outwardly.	Their	inner	J	contributes	an	inner	seriousness	and	sense	of
intentionality.	Indeed,	this	is	a	common	reason	IPs	mistype	as	IJs;	they	mistake
their	inner	judging	process	(i.e.,	self-directed	Fi	or	Ti)	for	IJs’	external	judging
process	(i.e.,	outer-directed	Fe	or	Te).
In	many	respects,	IPs	are	“inner	control	freaks.”	They	are	the	most	independent
of	all	types	with	respect	to	their	logical	(ITPs)	or	feeling-based	judgments
(IFPs).	Thus,	when	others	make	demands	of	them,	they	can	become	frustrated	or
even	resentful.	Such	demands	disrupt	their	self-directed	judging	process	and
force	them	to	shift	their	attention	outwardly.	IPs	deplore	being	forced	to	face
externalities	that	they	would	rather	avoid	or	approach	on	their	own	terms.	In
such	instances,	they	may	think	to	themselves:	“I	wish	people	would	just	leave
me	alone	and	let	me	do	things	my	own	way.”
IPs’	penchant	for	control	can	at	times	be	irksome	to	others,	especially	in
situations	involving	group	planning.	Since	IPs	are	not	terribly	keen	on	planning
and	dislike	making	decisions	that	affect	others,	they	can	be	less	than	enthusiastic
when	it	comes	to	doing	their	fair	share	of	planning	for	a	group	event.	Then,	after
plans	have	already	been	forged,	it	is	not	uncommon	for	IPs	to	hint	or	complain
about	how	they	would	have	done	things	differently.	Hence,	when	it	comes	to
doing	things	with	others,	IPs	are	conflicted.	On	the	one	hand,	they	want	to	be	in
control	in	order	to	avoid	being	controlled	by	others’	decisions.	On	the	other
hand,	they	abnegate	control	because	they	don’t	like	making	decisions	or	being
responsible	for	others.
These	same	control	issues	tend	to	surface	in	IPs’	work	lives.	Namely,	since	they
don’t	like	being	controlled	or	criticized	by	others,	it	can	be	difficult	for	them	to
function	as	employees	(especially	ITPs).	In	response,	they	may	try	their	hand	at
management	in	order	to	avoid	being	controlled;	they	exchange	being	the
controlee	for	being	the	controller.	The	problem	with	this	is	IPs	are	not
authentically	interested	in	managing	others.	While	it	may	give	their	inferior
function	(Te	or	Fe)	a	temporary	ego	boost,	management	is	not	an	authentic	IP
activity;	self-management	is,	managing	others	is	not.	It	is	generally	better	to
allow	extraverts	or	J	types	to	take	care	of	the	managing,	freeing	IPs	to	seek	or
create	work	that	allows	them	to	function	more	autonomously.
Like	other	types,	IPs	partake	in	an	ongoing	drama	between	their	dominant	and
inferior	functions.	While	understanding	their	control	issues,	as	just	described,	is
a	good	first	step	toward	personal	growth,	IPs	can	also	benefit	from
understanding	their	type’s	dominant-inferior	dynamics.
For	IFPs,	the	Fi-Te	function	pair	creates	a	tension	between	personal	judgments
(Fi)	on	the	one	hand,	and	collective	methods	and	standards	(Te)	on	the	other.
IFPs	typically	emphasize	the	former,	championing	the	unique	tastes	and
preferences	of	the	individual	(Fi),	but	they	can	also	be	enticed	by	standardized
methods	and	operations	(Te).	IFPs	also	experience	a	tension	between	their
personal	needs	and	interests	(Fi)	and	their	sense	of	collective	duty	and
responsibility	(Te).	Those	over-identifying	with	their	inferior	Te	may	highlight
the	degree	to	which	they	are	dutiful,	responsible,	smart	(read	logical),	or
organized.	At	times,	this	may	lead	them	to	mistype	as	IFJs,	ITPs	or,	less
commonly,	as	ITJs.
The	challenge	for	ITPs	is	reconciling	Ti	and	Fe.	This	involves	a	balancing	act
between	self	(Ti)	and	others	(Fe),	independence	(Ti)	and	relationships	(Fe),	self-
mastery	(Ti)	and	external	acclaim	(Fe).	While	ITPs	undoubtedly	need	other
people,	they	may	fail	to	consistently	acknowledge	this	need	or	invest	in	their
relationships.	This	can	result	in	a	pattern	of	broken	or	abandoned	relationships,
or,	at	its	worst,	complete	social	isolation.	Furthermore,	the	inferior	function	may
beckon	ITPs	to	generalize	(Fe)	their	own	Ti	views	or	methods,	which	may
include	grandiose	dreams	of	fame	or	recognition	(Fe).	It	can	also	engender	naïve
views	of	love,	manifesting	as	childlike	sentimentalism	or	romantic	idealism.
ITPs’	status	as	inner	judgers	may	at	times	lead	them	to	mistype	as	J	types,	while
their	inferior	Fe	may	contribute	to	their	mistyping	as	feelers.	For	an	in-depth
look	at	ITP	inferior	function	issues,	be	sure	to	explore	my	recent	book	on	INTPs.
IJ	Types
IJs	are	also	a	mixture	of	J-P	characteristics.	Outwardly,	they	are	judgers,	well
deserving	of	the	J	label.	They	can	be	firm,	direct,	and	outspoken,	at	times	even
resembling	EJ	types.	But	since	their	dominant	function	is	a	perceiving	function
(Ni	or	Si),	they	can	also	be	understood	as	“inner	perceivers.”
As	inner	perceivers,	IJs’	primary	goal	is	not	one	of	control	or	action,	but	of
perception;	they	inwardly	perceive	before	they	outwardly	judge.	Just	as	IPs’
inner	J	is	rather	serious	and	intentional,	IJs’	inner	P	is	more	carefree	and	playful.
They	are	far	less	closed	or	serious	inwardly	than	they	appear	outwardly.
IJs’	perceptive	nature	may	be	most	easily	discerned	in	childhood.	An	INFJ	friend
of	mine,	for	instance,	recounts	spending	countless	hours	alone	in	her	room
engrossed	in	her	imagination	and	playing	with	percepts	through	drawing	and
painting.	Similarly,	an	ISTJ	friend	spent	much	of	his	childhood	immersed	in
perceiving,	avidly	following	an	array	of	college	and	professional	sports	teams,
including	glutting	himself	on	sports-related	facts	and	statistics.	He	is	now	a	play-
by-play	commentator	for	a	minor	league	baseball	team.
While	IPs	start	the	day	with	a	judging	mindset	(Ti	or	Fi),	IJs	prefer	a	more
leisurely	and	perceptive	approach	(Ni	or	Si),	allowing	their	judging	process	(Fe
or	Te)	to	emerge	organically	or	spontaneously	rather	than	intentionally.
Therefore,	when	it	comes	to	initiating	the	judging	process,	IJs	may	patiently	wait
(or	delay)	as	long	as	EPs	do.
To	illustrate,	an	INTJ	once	told	me	that	his	ideal	day	would	consistent	mostly	of
open-ended	perceiving,	with	periodic	interruptions	to	help	others	analyze	and
troubleshoot	problems.	The	image	this	brings	to	mind	is	one	of	sage	or	advisor,
an	individual	who	patiently	waits	for	problems	to	emerge	that	his	Ni	and	Te	can
then	work	to	resolve.	From	this	we	can	see	that	IJs,	as	predominant	perceivers,
IJs	are	in	some	respects	like	EPs.	The	primary	difference	is	that	IJs	respond	with
analysis	whereas	EPs	are	wired	to	respond	with	action	(ESPs)	or	potential
options	(ENPs).
Like	other	types,	IJs	must	navigate	a	perpetual	drama	between	their	dominant
and	inferior	function.	INJs	work	to	balance	their	dominant	Ni	with	their	inferior
Se,	to	integrate	convergent	inner	perception	(Ni)	with	divergent	outer	perception
(Se).	This	is	sometimes	experienced	as	a	struggle	between	analyzing	and
interpreting	the	world	from	afar	(Ni)	and	acting	in	a	concrete	way	(Se).	INJs
often	worry	that	they	aren’t	really	living	life,	but	merely	observing	it	from	the
sidelines.	They	feel	conflicted	about	the	degree	to	which	they	can	or	should	act
(Se)	in	order	to	actualize	or	materialize	their	Ni	ideals.
Like	ENPs,	ISJs	strive	to	reconcile	the	“tried	and	true”	(Si)	with	the	new	and
novel	(Ne).	In	the	following	Personality	Junkie	excerpt,	Elaine	Schallock
describes	ISJs’	relationship	with	their	inferior	Ne:	“ISJs	are	usually	not	apt	to
engage	in	truly	radical	or	risky	thoughts	or	behavior.	Their	explorations	into	the
realm	of	Ne	are	generally	limited	to	ideas	that	don’t	risk	challenging	their	beliefs
or	core	principles.	Getting	an	ISJ	to	try	something	new	can	be	a	crapshoot;
depending	on	the	perceived	riskiness	of	the	activity	and	the	openness	of	their
inferior	Ne	to	take	on	the	unknown,	an	ISJ	may	or	may	not	be	open	to	trying	or
learning	something	new.	More	often,	ISJs	latch	onto	a	favorite	belief	or	pastime
and	proceed	to	work	endless	variations	(Ne)	of	the	same	basic	theme.	Friends
and	family	may	thus	all	end	up	with	the	same	home-made	teapot	cozy	but	each
in	a	different	color	or	pattern.”
Summary
What	follows	is	a	summary	of	some	distinguishing	characteristics	of	EPs,	EJs,
IPs,	and	IJs	that	may	prove	useful	in	discerning	your	type:
EPs:
Utilize	P-J-P	process
“Purest”	perceivers
Prefer	a	state	of	outer	perception	or	perception	combined	with	physical
action	(ESPs)
Outwardly	open,	adaptable,	and	informal
Neither	strongly	seek	nor	readily	experience	convergence	in	beliefs	/
worldview	(especially	ENPs)
Least	concerned	of	all	types	with	external	order	/	structure	(especially
ENPs)
EJs:
Utilize	J-P-J	process
“Purest”	judgers
Take	a	pro-active,	intentional	approach	to	the	outside	world
Outwardly	direct,	firm,	assertive,	and	opinionated
Seek,	experience,	and	exhibit	convergence	in	beliefs	/	worldview
Seek	and	prefer	external	structure,	the	nature	of	which	may	vary	by	T-F
preference
IPs:
Utilize	J-P-J	process
Mixture	of	J	and	P	characteristics
Take	a	pro-active,	intentional	approach	toward	their	interests	and	ordering
their	inner	world
Outwardly	receptive,	adaptable,	and	informal
Seek,	but	struggle	to	obtain	(especially	INPs),	convergence	in	beliefs	/
worldview
May	appreciate	some	degree	of	external	structure,	but	mostly	when	self-
initiated
IJs:
Utilize	P-J-P	process
Mixture	of	J	and	P	characteristics
Prefer	a	state	of	relaxed,	inner	perception
Outwardly	direct,	firm,	and	opinionated
Do	not	strongly	seek,	but	experience	and	exhibit,	convergence	in	beliefs	/
worldview
Prefer	/	tolerate	external	structure,	but	inconsistent	in	actively	procuring	it
Appendix	I.	Type	Clarifier	Assessment
The	purpose	of	this	assessment	is	to	help	you	identify	your	four-letter
personality	type.	It	is	unique	in	that	it	assesses	your	preferences	(Part	I)	and	your
functions	(Part	II),	then	shows	you	how	to	cross-check	your	results.	Remember,
it	is	important	to	confirm	and	clarify	your	type	through	other	means	described	in
this	book.
Part	I.	Preference	Clarifier
For	the	following	36	items,	select	the	letter	associated	with	the	word	or	phrase
that	best	describes	your	historical	personality.	Try	not	to	overthink	your
responses.	If	you	are	unsure	of	how	to	respond,	you	can	leave	the	item
unmarked.
1.
c.	Compete
d.	Cooperate
2.
e.	Details
f.	Overview
3.
a.	Teach
b.	Facilitate
4.
g.	Self
h.	Group
5.
d.	Helping
c.	Advancing
6.
e.	Actual
f.	Potential
7.
a.	Plan	ahead
b.	Improvise
8.
d.	Sympathize
c.	Strategize
9.
f.	Envision
e.	Enact
10.
g.	One	great	friend
h.	Many	good	friends
11.
a.	Direct
b.	Indirect
12.
f.	Theory
e.	Practice
13.
c.	Achievement
d.	Compassion
14.
g.	Inner	world
h.	Outer	world
15.
e.	Tangible
f.	Abstract
16.
d.	Beautiful
c.	Useful
17.
g.	Anxious	in	the	world
h.	At	home	in	the	world
18.
f.	Idea
e.	Reality
19.
h.	Work	with	others
g.	Work	independently
20.
c.	Utility
d.	Morality
21.
g.	Self-conscious
h.	Unhesitating
22.
d.	Emotional
c.	Logical
23.
g.	Alone	time
h.	“Out	and	about”
24.
e.	Doing
f.	Imagining
25.
c.	Optimize
d.	Empathize
26.
e.	Facts
f.	Theory
27.
a.	Standardized
b.	Makeshift
28.
e.	Down-to-earth
f.	Absent-minded
29.	When	surrounded	by	noise	or	commotion	I	tend	to	feel…
h.	Calm,	composed,	and	comfortable
g.	Anxious,	overwhelmed,	or	unsettled
30.	At	work	or	school,	others	see	me	as	more…
b.	Open,	receptive,	and	casual
a.	Orderly,	direct,	and	serious
31.	In	social	situations,	I	tend	to	stay	in	the…
g.	Background
h.	Foreground
32.	After	making	a	decision	or	drawing	a	conclusion,	I…
a.	Typically	don’t	change	my	mind,	at	least	not	in	a	major	way
b.	Often	end	up	questioning,	even	overturning,	my	original	judgment
33.	In	emotional	situations	I	tend	to…
d.	Feel	others’	emotions
c.	Feel	uncomfortable	or	inadequate
34.	In	social	situations	I	tend	to…
b.	Adapt	to	and	blend	with	other	people
a.	Assert	my	own	views	or	wishes
35.	In	general…
c.	I	prefer	not	to	be	bothered	with	others’	personal	needs
d.	I	feel	responsible	for	or	compelled	to	meet	others’	needs
36.	When	asked	to	plan	for	a	group	vacation	I	would	likely…
a.	Plan	carefully	and	thoroughly,	perhaps	even	formulating	a	timeline	or	agenda
b.	Plan	only	a	rough	outline,	expecting	to	figure	out	everything	else	“on	the	fly”
Scoring
Total	your	responses	for	each	letter	below:
a____
b____
c____
d____
e____
f____
g____
h____
Interpretation
If	g	>	h,	your	preference	is	likely	introversion	(I).
If	h	>	g,	your	preference	is	likely	extraversion	(E).
If	e	>	f,	your	preference	is	likely	sensing	(S).
If	f	>	e,	your	preference	is	likely	intuition	(N).
If	c	>	d,	your	preference	is	likely	thinking	(T).
If	d	>	c,	your	preference	is	likely	feeling	(F).
If	a	>	b,	your	preference	is	likely	judging	(J).
If	b	>	a,	your	preference	is	likely	perceiving	(P).
Record	your	four	preferences	below:
___	___	___	___
If	you	are	confident	in	your	results,	this	may	well	be	your	personality	type.	To
confirm	or	further	clarify	your	type,	continue	to	Part	II.
Part	II.	Function	Clarifier
To	clarify	your	preferred	functions,	rank	the	following	eight	descriptions	from	1-
8,	with	1	being	the	most	descriptive	of	your	historical	personality	and	8	being	the
least.
a.___I	am	a	take-charge,	no-nonsense	type	of	person.	I’m	not	afraid	to	take	the
lead	or	issue	directives	or	correctives	to	others.	My	mind	seems	to	work	quite
efficiently	and	decisively.	It	is	typically	easy	for	me	to	make	decisions,	give
advice	or	instructions,	and	get	things	done	without	getting	bogged	down	with
emotional	concerns.	Others	see	me	as	firm	and	forthright,	perhaps	even	blunt.	I
enjoy	staying	busy	and	using	my	time	effectively.	On	the	whole,	I	take	a	rational
approach	to	life	and	can	feel	uncomfortable	or	inadequate	in	emotional
situations.	I’m	more	inclined	to	offer	advice	than	to	spend	time	commiserating.
Consequently,	I’m	most	comfortable	in	work-related	situations,	especially	when
analyzing	problems,	completing	tasks,	or	issuing	directives.	I	also	enjoy	thinking
about	strategies	and	logistics,	or	ways	of	making	systems	or	processes	more
efficient	and	productive.
b.___	In	some	respects,	I	feel	like	an	alien	in	the	world.	I	am	more	of	an
observer	and	analyzer	of	life	than	a	participant.	This	can	make	it	scary	for	me	to
act	or	make	big	changes	in	my	life.	Typically,	my	mind	is	fairly	zen-like,
characterized	by	a	state	of	relaxed	awareness	that	straddles	the	conscious	and
unconscious	mind.	In	this	state,	my	mind	is	not	restless	or	flooded	with	random
ideas,	but	is	generally	calm	and	synchronized.	When	presented	with	a	problem,
my	mind	works	in	a	unified	way	to	simultaneously	see	different	perspectives	and
“realize”	answers.	At	times,	these	answers	or	insights	can	come	suddenly	and	all
at	once,	like	a	tidal	wave	of	knowing;	for	me,	there	is	a	real	difference	between
believing	something	and	knowing	something.	I	can	get	discouraged,	however,
when	others	don’t	seem	to	understand	or	respond	to	my	insights	with	a	similar
sense	of	conviction.	In	many	cases,	people	seem	to	disregard	my	insights,
suggest	I’m	being	too	negative	or	pessimistic,	or	think	I’m	blowing	things	out	of
proportion.	But	I’m	simply	being	honest,	calling	things	as	I	see	them,	and	in
most	cases,	I’m	eventually	proven	right.	Indeed,	I	see	it	as	my	primary	role	to
perceive	things	accurately	and	correct	false	perceptions—to	bring	the	truth	to
light.	Despite	seeming	opinionated	and	strong-minded,	it	is	not	unusual	for
others	to	turn	to	me	for	answers,	insights,	or	advice.
c.___I	spend	a	fair	amount	of	time	surveying	and	weighing	my	personal	feelings
and	values.	Since	it	is	important	that	I	live	a	moral	and	authentic	life,	I	see	it	as
important	to	consider	exactly	what	that	means	and	might	look	like	for	me.	I	need
time	to	listen	to	what	my	heart	and	conscience	tell	me	is	right.	I	think	the	world
would	be	a	better	place	if	everyone	learned	to	tune	into	his	or	her	inner	moral
compass.	Part	of	my	moral	code	involves	“fighting	for	the	underdogs”—those
who	are	poor,	sick,	disabled,	victims	of	injustice,	or	otherwise	find	themselves	in
unfortunate	circumstances.	I	also	enjoy	caring	for	children,	plants,	animals,	or
whatever	personally	affects	or	moves	me.	I	have	the	ability	to	deeply	empathize
with	others.	When	I	imagine	myself	in	others’	shoes,	I	feel	for	them	and	it
inspires	me	to	respond.	Others	typically	see	me	as	a	good	listener—empathetic
and	non-judgmental.	At	times,	I	can	feel	emotionally	over-burdened,	having
internalized	others’	pain	and	struggles.	When	it	comes	to	emotions,	I	tend	to	be
more	of	a	receiver	than	an	a	expresser.	I	manage	my	feelings	on	my	own	rather
than	unloading	them	onto	others.	I	therefore	feel	that	most	people	don’t	really
know	me	or	see	what	is	most	important	to	me.
d.___I	am	a	“people	person.”	I’m	generally	warm	and	personable,	with	a	knack
for	making	quick	connections	with	people.	I	like	to	talk	and	routinely	enjoy
conversation	with	friends,	family,	co-workers,	and	even	strangers.	Generally
speaking,	I	am	firm	and	forthright	in	expressing	my	views	and	opinions.	While
typically	tactful,	I	am	reluctant	to	let	my	voice	go	unheard.	I	enjoy	teaching,
managing,	and	directing	people,	helping	them	to	be	and	achieve	their	very	best.
In	many	ways,	I	feel	responsible	for	the	emotional	well-being	and	success	of
others.	I	want	them	to	excel,	both	individually	and	interpersonally.	I	enjoy
finding	ways	of	bringing	people	together,	helping	them	communicate	and	get	on
the	same	emotional	page.	If	I’m	being	honest,	I’m	really	not	as	good	at	listening
to	others	as	I	am	at	advising	or	teaching	them.	On	more	than	one	occasion,	I
have	been	guilty	of	giving	unsolicited	advice	or	opening	my	mouth	when	I
probably	shouldn’t	have.	Nevertheless,	people	often	turn	to	me	for	support	and
guidance	regarding	their	lives	and	relationships.
e.___I	am	generally	a	person	of	routine.	I	see	no	problem	with	continuing	to	do
things	the	way	they	have	been	done	in	the	past,	with	sticking	to	the	“tried	and
true.”	Doing	so	makes	life	simpler	and	keeps	things	consistent.	I	tend	to	agree
with	the	old	saying,	“If	it	ain’t	broke	don’t	fix	it!”	I	don’t	understand	why	so
many	people	think	it’s	a	good	idea	to	modify	or	abandon	time-tested	methods	or
traditions	(i.e.,	The	Constitution,	religious	traditions,	etc.).	I	personally	believe
that	if	something	has	been	resilient	enough	to	stand	the	test	of	time,	it’s	probably
worth	preserving	and	protecting.	I	enjoy	reflecting	on	my	personal	past,	as	well
as	various	traditions—familial,	religious,	historical,	political,	etc.—that	are
important	to	me.	I	feel	safe,	secure,	nostalgic,	and	reassured	when	I	reflect	on
these	things.	When	it	comes	to	money	and	material	goods,	I	tend	to	be	fairly
conservative.	I	am	typically	careful	not	to	be	wasteful	or	extravagant	in	my
expenditures.	When	it	comes	to	work,	I	like	to	know	exactly	what	the	rules	and
procedures	are	so	I	can	do	my	job	properly.	I	feel	the	details	of	a	job	are
important	and	should	not	be	ignored	or	overlooked.	Others	see	me	as	a	loyal,
reliable,	dutiful,	and	responsible.
f.___I	am	a	fun-loving	person	who	relishes	spontaneous	action.	I	don't	waste
time	over-thinking	things.	I	usually	perform	better	and	enjoy	myself	more	when
I	just	do	what	comes	naturally.	I	love	taking	in	new	experiences	and	sensations
—new	sights,	sounds,	tastes,	and	so	on.	I	enjoy	using	my	hands	and	losing
myself	in	activities	such	as	sports,	sex,	cooking,	driving,	dancing,	shopping,
exercising,	and	the	like.	If	given	a	choice,	I	prefer	to	be	up	and	moving	around
rather	than	sitting.	I	tend	to	get	restless	fairly	quickly	and	am	happier	when	I’m
being	active.	I’m	not	a	terribly	abstract	person	and	have	never	been	a	huge	fan	of
book	learning.	I’d	rather	learn	from	experience	than	from	books	or	lectures.	In
my	view,	experience	is	probably	life’s	best	teacher.	I’m	also	a	highly	observant
person.	I	tend	to	notice	and	recall	details	that	others	may	overlook.	Keeping	pace
with	current	styles	and	fashions	is	also	fun	for	me,	including	things	like	trendy
cars,	phones,	fashions,	hairstyles,	decor,	etc.
g.___Independence,	autonomy,	and	personal	freedom	are	among	my	highest
values;	some	people	might	even	call	me	a	loner.	While	I	have	little	interest	or
aptitude	in	leading	or	managing	others,	I	also	don’t	want	people	controlling	me
or	telling	me	what	to	do.	When	working	within	a	system	or	organization,	I	often
find	myself	at	odds	with	it	and	end	up	looking	for	ways	to	circumvent	what	I	see
as	unnecessary	rules	or	inefficient	methods.	This	of	course	can	be	anxiety-
producing,	so	working	for	myself	is	probably	my	best	option.	Perhaps	more	than
anything,	I	want	to	find	work	that	I	enjoy;	my	work	is	of	utmost	importance	to
me.	Unfortunately,	finding	my	ideal	work	has	been	difficult	due	to	my	strong
need	for	autonomy,	as	well	recurrent	indecisiveness	about	what	I	should	be
doing.	Efficiency	is	another	of	my	top	priorities.	Thinking	of	time	as	a	currency
for	accomplishment,	I	can	be	rather	impatient	when	it	comes	to	navigating
unexpected	hurdles	or	obstacles.	Outwardly,	I	present	as	easygoing	and	affable,
readily	adapting	and	meshing	to	the	social	context.	Inwardly,	I	am	far	more
serious	and	resolute,	constantly	thinking	about	my	work	or	projects	and	what	my
next	step	should	be.
h.___I	have	a	restless	and	active	(some	might	even	say	hyperactive)	mind.	It	is
constantly	generating	new	ideas	and	seeing	new	connections,	associations,	and
possibilities	(“the	possibilities	are	endless!”).	I	often	see	random	connections	or
parallels	between	things	that	others	fail	to	see	or	appreciate.	I	love	playing	with
words,	ideas,	associations,	and	quips.	Compelled	to	explore	and	exhaust	all	the
options	and	possibilities,	I	struggle	to	make	decisions	or	draw	firm	conclusions.
When	a	promising	new	idea	or	possibility	comes	to	me,	I	tend	to	get	really
excited	and	want	to	share	it	with	others.	Unfortunately,	the	excitement	often
wanes	once	the	novelty	wears	off	or	the	idea	proves	less	tenable.	These	ups	and
downs	can	make	it	hard	for	me	to	stick	with	one	thing	or	to	finish	what	I	start.
Since	I	tend	to	bounce	from	one	idea	and	interest	to	the	next,	I	sometimes
wonder	if	I’ll	ever	accomplish	anything	important.	I	know	I	have	a	lot	of
creative	potential,	but	I	often	struggle	to	harness	and	focus	it.	Others	may	see	me
as	quirky,	chatty,	distractible,	inquisitive,	creative,	unconventional,	and	open-
minded.
Scoring
Record	your	rankings	below:
___	a.	=	Te
___	b.	=	Ni
___	c.	=	Fi
___	d.	=	Fe
___	e.	=	Si
___	f.	=	Se
___	g.	=	Ti
___	h.	=	Ne
Integrating	Part	I	&	Part	II
Before	proceeding	further,	you	may	wish	to	consult	Appendix	II	to	identify	the
dominant	and	auxiliary	functions	of	your	personality	type	from	Part	I.	After
doing	so,	follow	these	instructions:
1.	Compare	your	top-ranked	function	with	the	dominant	function	of	your	type
from	Part	I.	If	they	match,	you	have	likely	confirmed	your	type.	
2.	If	your	top-ranked	function	matches	the	auxiliary	function	of	your	type	from
Part	I,	or	if	your	second-ranked	function	matches	the	dominant	function	of	your
type	from	Part	I,	you	may	need	to	further	clarify	your	E-I	or	other	preferences.
3.	If	neither	your	top	nor	second-ranked	function	matches	the	dominant	or
auxiliary	function	of	your	type	from	Part	I,	you	may	need	to	further	clarify	your
J-P	or	other	preferences.
Additional	Considerations
In	most	cases,	results	from	Part	II	do	not	perfectly	align	with	each	of	the
functions	in	your	type’s	functional	stack.	This	does	not	mean	that	type	theory	is
wrong,	but	only	that,	for	reasons	we	discussed	in	Chapter	1,	personality	testing	is
not	an	exact	science.
One	reason	Part	I	and	Part	II	results	may	fail	to	match	is	the	confounding
influence	of	one’s	E-I	preference.	For	instance,	an	INTJ	might	rightly	rank	Ni
first,	but	select	Ti	(rather	than	the	predicted	Te)	as	his	second	preferred	function.
This	may	result	from	not	identifying	with	various	extraverted	elements	of	the	Te
description	(e.g.,	being	a	“take-charge”	person)	and/or	identifying	with
introverted	elements	of	the	Ti	description	(e.g.,	needing	independence	and
autonomy).
With	that	said,	even	when	a	selected	function	diverges	from	what	is	predicted
with	respect	to	its	E-I	direction,	the	overall	ordering	of	the	basic	functions	(S,	N,
T,	F)	often	follows	that	of	the	functional	stack.	So	even	if	an	INTJ	ranks	Ti	as	his
second	preferred	function,	this	still	aligns	with	the	predicted	order	of	his	having
an	N	dominant	and	T	auxiliary	function.
Here	are	the	actual	test	results	of	the	INTJ	I’ve	been	referencing:
1.	Ni
2.	Ti
3.	Fi
4.	Ne
5.	Te
6.	Fe
7.	Se
8.	Si
For	the	sake	of	illustration,	I	want	to	make	just	a	couple	more	observations	about
these	results.	First,	it	is	not	surprising	that,	as	an	introvert,	three	of	his	top
rankings	were	introverted	functions.	Second,	it	is	worth	noting	how	the	basic
ordering	of	his	functions	is	generally	consistent	with	the	predictions	of	type
theory	for	an	INTJ	(i.e.,	N-T-F-S).	This	speaks	to	the	value	of	looking	for
general	trends	when	working	to	discern	one’s	type.	The	last	thing	I’ll	mention	is
that,	upon	further	study	and	self-exploration,	people	typically	come	to	see	their
preferred	functions	more	clearly.	Thus,	our	INTJ	might	eventually	conclude	that
he	does	prefer	Te	over	Ti.	This	reinforces	the	importance	of	using	a	multi-
pronged	approach	to	clarifying	your	type	rather	than	relying	solely	on
personality	assessments.
Appendix	II.	Functional	Stacks	of	the	16	Types
If	you	study	the	functional	stacks	for	a	few	different	personality	types,	you	can
familiarize	yourself	with	patterns	and	logic	of	how	they	are	organized.	Once	you
understand	the	rules	and	patterns,	you	won’t	need	to	memorize	each	type’s
functional	stack,	but	will	be	able	to	deduce	it.
For	your	convenience,	I’ve	included	the	J-P	criteria	from	the	Introduction	to	help
you	understand	the	logic	behind	the	functional	stack.	This	is	followed	by	a	list	of
the	functional	stacks	for	all	16	personality	types.
1.	A	given	type’s	J-P	designation	(i.e.,	the	fourth	letter	of	the	type)	refers	largely
to	its	outer	(i.e.,	extraverted)	presentation.	Hence,	J	types	will	extravert	a	judging
attitude	(firm,	decisive,	opinionated,	etc.),	while	P	types	will	display	a	perceiving
attitude	(open,	flexible,	receptive,	etc.).
2.	For	extraverts,	the	nature	of	the	dominant	function	(i.e.,	its	status	as	a	judging
or	perceiving	function)	matches	their	J-P	designation.	For	example,	ENTPs'
dominant	function,	Ne,	is	a	perceiving	function	and	ENTJs’	dominant	function,
Te,	is	a	judging	function.
3.	For	introverts,	things	are	more	confusing,	since	the	nature	of	their	dominant
function	opposes	their	J-P	designation.	We	saw	this	with	INTPs	above.	Namely,
despite	being	classified	as	a	P	type,	INTPs’	dominant	function	(Ti)	is	a	judging
function.	To	understand	why	INTPs	and	other	IPs	are	considered	P	rather	than	J
types,	see	number	one	above.
INFJ
Dominant:	Introverted	Intuition	(Ni)
Auxiliary:	Extraverted	Feeling	(Fe)
Tertiary:	Introverted	Thinking	(Ti)
Inferior:	Extraverted	Sensing	(Se)
INTJ
Dominant:	Introverted	Intuition	(Ni)
Auxiliary:	Extraverted	Thinking	(Te)
Tertiary:	Introverted	Feeling	(Fi)
Inferior:	Extraverted	Sensing	(Se)
INTP
Dominant:	Introverted	Thinking	(Ti)
Auxiliary:	Extraverted	Intuition	(Ne)
Tertiary:	Introverted	Sensing	(Si)
Inferior:	Extraverted	Feeling	(Fe)
ISTP
Dominant:	Introverted	Thinking	(Ti)
Auxiliary:	Extraverted	Sensing	(Se)
Tertiary:	Introverted	Intuition	(Ni)
Inferior:	Extraverted	Feeling	(Fe)
INFP
Dominant:	Introverted	Feeling	(Fi)
Auxiliary:	Extraverted	Intuition	(Ne)
Tertiary:	Introverted	Sensing	(Si)
Inferior:	Extraverted	Thinking	(Te)
ISFP
Dominant:	Introverted	Feeling	(Fi)
Auxiliary:	Extraverted	Sensing	(Se)
Tertiary:	Introverted	Intuition	(Ni)
Inferior:	Extraverted	Thinking	(Te)
ISFJ
Dominant:	Introverted	Sensing	(Si)
Auxiliary:	Extraverted	Feeling	(Fe)
Tertiary:	Introverted	Thinking	(Ti)
Inferior:	Extraverted	Intuition	(Ne)
ISTJ
Dominant:	Introverted	Sensing	(Si)
Auxiliary:	Extraverted	Thinking	(Te)
Tertiary:	Introverted	Feeling	(Fi)
Inferior:	Extraverted	Intuition	(Ne)
ENFP
Dominant:	Extraverted	Intuition	(Ne)
Auxiliary:	Introverted	Feeling	(Fi)
Tertiary:	Extraverted	Thinking	(Te)
Inferior:	Introverted	Sensing	(Si)
ENTP
Dominant:	Extraverted	Intuition	(Ne)
Auxiliary:	Introverted	Thinking	(Ti)
Tertiary:	Extraverted	Feeling	(Fe)
Inferior:	Introverted	Sensing	(Si)
ENFJ
Dominant:	Extraverted	Feeling	(Fe)
Auxiliary:	Introverted	Intuition	(Ni)
Tertiary:	Extraverted	Sensing	(Se)
Inferior:	Introverted	Thinking	(Ti)
ESFJ
Dominant:	Extraverted	Feeling	(Fe)
Auxiliary:	Introverted	Sensing	(Si)
Tertiary:	Extraverted	Intuition	(Ne)
Inferior:	Introverted	Thinking	(Ti)
ENTJ
Dominant:	Extraverted	Thinking	(Te)
Auxiliary:	Introverted	Intuition	(Ni)
Tertiary:	Extraverted	Sensing	(Se)
Inferior:	Introverted	Feeling	(Fi)
ESTJ
Dominant:	Extraverted	Thinking	(Te)
Auxiliary:	Introverted	Sensing	(Si)
Tertiary:	Extraverted	Intuition	(Ne)
Inferior:	Introverted	Feeling	(Fi)
ESFP
Dominant:	Extraverted	Sensing	(Se)
Auxiliary:	Introverted	Feeling	(Fi)
Tertiary:	Extraverted	Thinking	(Te)
Inferior:	Introverted	Intuition	(Ni)
ESTP
Dominant:	Extraverted	Sensing	(Se)
Auxiliary:	Introverted	Thinking	(Ti)
Tertiary:	Extraverted	Feeling	(Fe)
Inferior:	Introverted	Intuition	(Ni)
References	&	Resources
To	learn	more	about	the	16	personality	types,	including	their	careers,
relationships,	and	type	development,	I	encourage	you	to	visit	us	at	Personality
Junkie.	There,	you	can	also	take	additional	personality	tests	and	explore	our
other	books.	
1.	Drenth,	A.J.	The	16	Personality	Types:	Profiles,	Theory,	&	Type	Development.
Inquire	Books.	2013.
2.	Drenth,	A.J.	The	INTP:	Personality,	Careers,	Relationships,	&	the	Quest	for
Truth	and	Meaning.	Inquire	Books.	2013.
3.	Csikszentmihalyi,	Mihaly.	Flow:	The	Psychology	of	Optimal	Experience.
Harper.	2008.
4.	Jung,	Carl.	Psychological	Types.	Princeton	University	Press.	1971.
5.	Kagan,	Robert.	Galen’s	Prophecy:	Temperament	in	Human	Nature.	Westview
Press.	1997.
6.	Aron,	Elaine.	The	Highly	Sensitive	Person.	Broadway	Books.	1997.
7.	Myers,	Isabel	Briggs,	et	al.	The	MBTI	Manual:	A	Guide	to	the	Development
and	Use	of	the	Myers-Briggs	Type	Indicator.	CPP.	2003.
8.	Nardi,	Dario.	Neuroscience	of	Personality:	Brain	Savvy	Insights	for	All	Types
of	People.	Radiance	House.	2011.
9.	Pirsig,	Robert.	Zen	and	the	Art	of	Motorcycle	Maintenance.	Harper	Torch.
2006.
10.	Thomson,	Lenore.	Personality	Type:	An	Owner’s	Manual.	Shambhala.	1998.
Contents
Introduction
Part	I:	Effective	Typing:	Barriers	&	Strategies
1.	Barriers	to	Effective	Typing
2.	Strategies	for	Accurate	Typing
Part	II:	Clarifying	Your	Preferences
3.	Introversion	(I)	vs.	Extraversion	(E)
4.	Sensing	(S)	vs.	Intuition	(N)
5.	Thinking	(T)	vs.	Feeling	(F)
6.	Judging	(J)	vs.	Perceiving	(P)
Part	III:	Clarifying	Your	Functions
7.	Introduction	to	the	Eight	Functions
8.	Introverted	Intuition	(Ni)
9.	Extraverted	Intuition	(Ne)
10.	Introverted	Sensing	(Si)
11.	Extraverted	Sensing	(Se)
12.	Introverted	Thinking	(Ti)
13.	Extraverted	Thinking	(Te)
14.	Introverted	Feeling	(Fi)
15.	Extraverted	Feeling	(Fe)
Part	IV:	Additional	Clarification
16.	Type	Structuring:	What	It	Tells	Us	about	EPs,	EJs,	IPs,	&	IJs
Appendix	I.	Type	Clarifier	Assessment
Appendix	II.	Functional	Stacks	of	the	16	Types
References	&	Resources
